[Page 1]
Version of 24 February 2026
Briefing note on the Further Revised Consolidated Text of the
draft Regulations on Exploitation of Mineral Resources in the
Area
Prepared by the Secretary-General
I. Introduction
1. This briefing note provides an introduction to the Further Revised Consolidated Text of
the draft Regulations on Exploitation of Mineral Resources in the Area (hereinafter the
“draft Exploitation Regulations" or the "Text"), prepared pursuant to the Council's decision
of 18 July 2025, to assist delegations in their preparations for the thirty-first session of the
Council.
II. Background
2. During the thirtieth session of the Council, held in March and July 2025, the Council
completed the second reading of the Revised Consolidated Text of the draft Exploitation
Regulations, covering draft regulations from the Preamble through to draft regulation 107.
It is noted that the Annexes and the Schedule were not addressed during this reading.
3. On 18 July 2025, the Council adopted its Decision on a thematic approach to the
continuation of the elaboration of rules, regulations and procedures relating to exploitation
to resolve remaining key outstanding matters (ISBA/30/C/18). In this Decision, the Council
requested the Secretariat to prepare a further revised consolidated text, based on the
discussions during the thirtieth session, and to make it available on the website of the
International Seabed Authority well in advance of the first meeting of the thirty-first
session.
4. At the 339th meeting of the Council on 21 July 2025, the President of the Council
suggested that the deadline for submissions from delegations be set for 15 September 2025,
while inputs from the informal working groups and Groups of Friends of the President be
submitted by 1 December 2025.
5. The deadline for submissions from States and stakeholders was subsequently extended
by the Secretariat to 1 October 2025.
6. On 23 December 2025, the Secretariat published the following documents:
(a) the Further Revised Consolidated Text (document ISBA/31/C/CRP.1);
(b) a clean version of the Text (ISBA/31/C/CRP.2); and
(c) a Further Revised Suspense Document (ISBA/31/C/CRP.3)
7. On 12 February 2026, a revised version of the Text (ISBA/31/C/CRP.1/Rev.1) and a
revised clean version (ISBA/31/C/CRP.2/Rev.1) were published on the website of the
Authority, incorporating a number of comments received from delegations and correcting
minor editorial matters identified in the initial version of the document. A second revised
version of the Text (ISBA/31/C/CRP.1/Rev.2), and a second revised clean version
(ISBA/31/C/CRP.2/Rev.1) were published on 16 February 2026.
8. For the purposes of the present note, any reference to the Text hereinafter shall be
understood, unless otherwise specified, as a reference to document
ISBA/31/C/CRP.1/Rev.2.
III. Introduction to the Further Revised Consolidated Text
9. The Further Revised Consolidated Text reflects oral comments received during the
thirtieth session, as well as written proposals submitted by Member States, stakeholders,
Informal Working Groups, and Friends of the President initiatives. The Secretariat has
endeavoured to incorporate the diverse views expressed while maintaining the coherence
and legal integrity of the Text.
10. In delivering the mandate given to the Secretariat, a special task force was created
within the Office of Legal Affairs, led by its Director and integrating consultants with
1

[Page 2]
Version of 24 February 2026
relevant subject-matter expertise for the drafting process, in order to timely and accurately
deliver the Text, considering the volume of work and number of submissions from member
States, time allocated for the task and the substantial number of topics and areas of
speciality. The consultants, to a large extent, have worked in the past with the Open Ended
Working Group on Financial Terms of a Contract, the Informal Working Group on
Environmental on the Protection and Preservation of the Marine Environment, the Informal
Working Group on Inspection, Compliance and Enforcement and on the President’s text.
11. The primary objective of the Text is to facilitate informal, constructive discussions
within the Council during the thirty-first session, to harmonize and streamline the draft
regulations where possible, and to support the Council in advancing and finalizing its work
on the draft regulations.
12. To this end, alignment between various provisions has been enhanced by providing
alternatives and ensuring a consistent use of terms and phrases, where necessary also
through editorial amendments.
13. While the Text does not incorporate every individual oral and textual proposal received,
it seeks to reflect the full range of ideas and policy options expressed during and after the
thirtieth session. The Secretariat emphasizes that the absence of a specific textual
formulation from the Text does not prejudice its possible consideration and inclusion at a
later stage of the negotiations.
14. Extensive explanations and suggestions have been provided by the Secretariat in
comment boxes accompanying each draft regulation. These comments are intended to assist
delegations by ensuring consistency with the language and substantive content of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (the “Convention”) and the Agreement
relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea of 10 December 1982 (the “1994 Agreement”). Delegations may find these
comments helpful in understanding the rationale for certain formulations and in identifying
areas requiring further consideration.
15. In addition, where relevant, comment boxes include references to how the Agreement
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and
Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction (the
"BBNJ Agreement") addresses certain issues. These references are provided for
informational purposes only and are without prejudice to the Council’s authority to adopt
different or alternative solutions in the draft Exploitation Regulations.
16. The Text relies significantly on the work carried out by Informal Working Groups and
Friends of the President initiatives (hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Groups”).
Proposals from the Groups have been extensively incorporated, when necessary with minor
adjustments – such as the inclusion of brackets – required in light of the negotiations
conducted during the thirtieth session.
17. The tables below provide an overview of the outcomes of the intersessional work and
the proposals put forward by the Informal Working Groups (Table 1) and the Friends of the
President initiatives (Table 2). Delegations are encouraged to review these proposals in
conjunction with the relevant draft regulations.
Table 1
Informal Working Groups Outcome of the discussion / Proposal
presented for inclusion in the Text
Effective Control
• Comprehensive proposal on Effective
(draft regulations 5, 6, 7, 13, 21, 24, 24bis, 40, Control.
Annex I, Schedule)
Inspection, Compliance and Enforcement
• Proposal on draft regulation 95bis
Mechanism
(previously 102)
2

[Page 3]
Version of 24 February 2026
(draft regulation 95bis) • Proposal for a draft Council Decision
establishing the Compliance
Committee
• Proposal for draft Rules of Procedure
and draft Compliance Strategy for the
Compliance Committee
Equalisation Measure
• Summary of intersessional meetings
(draft regulation 64bis) and textual proposal for DR64bis
Rights and Interests of Coastal States
• Proposal on draft regulation 4, 4bis and
(draft regulation 4, 4bis, 93bis) 93bis on rights and interests of Coastal
States
Underwater Cultural Heritage
• Comprehensive set of proposals on
(Preamble, draft regulations 2, 4ter, 13, 15, 35, Underwater Cultural Heritage
44, 46, 47, 47bis, 59, 99, Annex III bis, Annex
IV, Schedule)
Environmental Management and Monitoring
• Proposal on Environmental Manage-
(draft regulations 49, 50, 50bis, 50ter, 51, 52, ment and Monitoring
Schedule)
Test and Pilot Mining
• Comprehensive proposal on Test and
(draft regulations 7, 11, 12, 13, 25, 46, 48, 48 Pilot Mining
ter, Annex II, Annex IV, Annex VII, Schedule) • Proposal on draft regulation 48ter
(clean version) and note on draft
regulation 48ter on outstanding issues
Reference to Regional Environmental
• Comprehensive proposal on the
Management Plans (REMPs)
reference to REMPs
(draft regulations 12, 14, 15, Annex IX,
Schedule)
Table 2
Friends of the President Outcome of the discussion / Proposal
presented for inclusion in the Text
Modification of a Plan of Work by a Contractor
• Proposal on draft regulation 57
(draft regulation 57)
Protection of Submarine Cables
• Proposal on draft regulation 31 and
(draft regulations 31 and 31bis) 31bis
Environmental Compensation Fund
• Proposal on the Environmental
(draft regulations 54, 55, 56) Compensation Fund
Review of Payment Mechanism
• Proposal on draft regulations 81 and
(draft regulation 81 and 82) 82
3

[Page 4]
Version of 24 February 2026
Seabed Mining Register
• Proposal on draft regulation 92
(draft regulation 92)
Prevention of Corruption
• Proposal on draft regulation 40
(draft regulation 40)
Environmental Goal and Objectives
• Proposal on draft regulation 44ter
(draft regulation 44ter)
Non-Compliance Notice, Suspension, and
• Proposal on draft regulations 103,
Termination of Exploitation Contract
103bis, 103ter and 103quat.
(draft regulations 103, 103bis, 103ter, 103quat.)
18. Purely editorial amendments have been introduced in the Text – including in the
proposals submitted by Groups. To avoid confusion, these changes – which include, inter
alia, standardization of references to articles, regulations and paragraphs, as well as to
Standards and Guidelines – have not been reflected in mark-up.
19. The methodology outlined in the previous paragraphs has been followed for the main
body of the Text, and for these definitions in the Schedule that have been provided by
Groups. Since a reading of the Annexes and the Schedule has never been conducted by the
Council, proposals received to refine those parts of the Text have been integrally included
without any previous evaluation by the Secretariat. As such, amendments made in those
parts of the Text must be considered as a compilation rather than a consolidation.
20. As for the previous versions, the Text is accompanied by a Further Revised Suspense
Document (ISBA/31/C/CRP.3), which contains all the elements to be relocated from the
draft Regulations on Exploitation of Mineral Resources in the Area to the Standards and
Guidelines and other Rules, Regulations and Procedures of the Authority.
21. For the first time, a clean version of the Text (ISBA/31/C/CRP.2/Rev.2) has also been
published, wherein all marked-up text has been accepted and the comment boxes removed.
The document is solely provided with an aim of offering to the Council a better overview
of how the content might look. It is highlighted that, in case of any inconsistency between
the two documents, the mark-up version shall prevail.
22. The Further Revised Consolidated Text and its related documents are non-binding and
without prejudice to any delegation’s position or the Council’s decisions. In this respect
and as a fundamental principle for the negotiations, it is therefore recalled that nothing is
agreed until everything is agreed. The Secretariat remains at the disposal of delegations to
provide any clarifications or additional information that may be required.
4