[Page 1]
ISBA/24/C/CRP.1
21 February 2018
English only
Briefing note to the Council on the submissions to the draft regulations on
exploitation of mineral resources in the Area1
1 This briefing note was prepared originally in advance of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom and
The Royal Society Workshop on the draft regulations for the exploitation of mineral resources in the Area: policy, legal and
institutional considerations held in London on 12 and 13 February 2018. It has been partially revised and is now re-issued as a
conference room paper for the meeting of the Council, 5 to 9 March 2018. A separate workshop report will be made available.
1

[Page 2]
2

[Page 3]
Contents
I. Introduction ........................................................................................................................4
II. Stakeholder submissions ...................................................................................................4
III. Common themes arising from stakeholder submissions ...............................................5
III. Stakeholder responses to general and specific questions ..............................................6
Annexures (Issue notes)
Annex I Issue Note 1: Understanding the pathway to exploitation and beyond ....................................13
Annex II Issue Note 2: The payment mechanism (including administrative fees) ...............................16
Annex III Issue Note 3: The role of the sponsoring State(s) ...............................................................19
Annex IV Issue Note 4: The role and legal status of standards, recommendations (LTC) and guidelines
........................................................................................................................................................21
Annex V Issue Note 5: Broader environmental policy and the regulations ........................................23
Annex VI Issue Note 6: The roles of the Council, Secretary-General and the Legal and Technical
Commission in regulation .................................................................................................................24
3

[Page 4]
Briefing note to the Council on the submissions to the draft regulations on exploitation of
mineral resources in the Area
I. Introduction
1. On 10 August 2017, the secretariat of the International Seabed Authority (ISA) made publicly
available the draft regulations on exploitation of mineral resources in the Area (draft regulations).2
Stakeholders were invited to make comments on the draft regulations, and in particular to address a
number of general and specific questions (ISBA/23/C/12).
2. The draft regulations reflect a common appreciation that having consolidated exploitation
regulations incorporating environmental and inspection provisions, would be more beneficial in providing
an integrated approach to the application process, and to the on-going management and regulation of
mining activities. Equally, the draft regulations aim to present the fundamentals of the application
process, and subsequent management and administration of contractor activities, rights and obligations.
Detailed plans of work (documentation), together with comprehensive process requirements and clear
performance standards that can be measured, monitored and enforced under an exploitation contract,
remain to be crafted.
3. The purpose of this briefing note is to provide members of the Council with a broad overview of
the content of the responses received to the above stakeholder exercise, and to discuss a number of
common themes arising from stakeholder submissions. An exchange of views on these common themes
took place at the London workshop in February 2018. It is anticipated that a focused discussion within the
Council on the common themes will help unpack key elements in the regulatory development process,
facilitate a better understanding of the issues faced, and enable the Council to provide appropriate
guidance to support the Legal and Technical Commission in its ongoing regulatory development role.
II. Stakeholder submissions
4. The secretariat received 55 submissions to the draft regulations.3 While this compares favourably
to some 54, 47 and 43 submissions received in connection with the Authority’s first stakeholder survey
(issued in March 2014), draft legal framework (issued in March 2015) and draft exploitation regulations
(issued in July 2016) respectively, responses from member States has increased from a handful to 19,
including a first response from a regional group (African Group).
5. Some stakeholder submissions provide high level responses to the questions asked, while others
have provided or elaborated on constituent elements of the regulations in more detail. It is not the
intention of this briefing note to discuss such specific detail, save to the extent it conflicts fundamentally
with the general content of the draft regulations issued. The Commission will consider all submissions at
its March 2018 meeting where a number of legal and technical matters will be discussed together with
required improvements and clarity in the structure of the draft regulations and regulatory text.
2 ISBA/23/LTC/CRP.3*.
3 A list of stakeholders making a submission is available at https://goo.gl/2aodWR, including links to individual submissions.
4

[Page 5]
6. The chart below shows the breakdown of stakeholder submissions by stakeholder category.
Submissions to draft Exploitation Regulations by stakeholder
category
19
20
18
16
14 12
12
10
8 6 6
6
3 3 3
4 2
1
2
0
III. Common themes arising from stakeholder submissions
7. This section of the briefing note highlights common themes arising across the responses to the
draft regulations. It is felt that these matters would benefit from further discussion and deliberation within
the Council. For each theme a short “Issue Note” has been prepared, and is made available as a relevant
annex to this briefing note. It is hoped that each Issue Note will help focus discussions by providing the
background to each issue, points for further consideration and guiding questions where applicable. Each
of these themes is addressed below.
8. Annex I: Issue Note 1 Understanding the pathway to exploitation and beyond: it is thought that
providing a clear overview and understanding of the respective phases under exploitation, and its link to
exploration will drive a better approach to the structure and flow of the regulations and the transition
between a pre-feasibility study/stage and feasibility study/stage.
9. Annex II: Issue Note 2 The payment mechanism (including administrative fees): a number of
points have been raised by stakeholders in connection with the payment mechanism, not least from those
who neither attended relevant workshops nor followed the development of the payment mechanism
closely. This Issue Note 2 explores briefly the guiding objectives and principles to the development of
financial terms under the Convention and the 1994 Agreement, together with an overview of work
undertaken to date in advancing the mechanism and ISA financial model.
10. Annex III: Issue Note 3 The role of the Sponsoring State(s): this has been an “open” issue since
the Commission adopted a number of “high level issues” for consideration in 2015. It was also addressed
as a specific question this time round to stakeholders, with a degree of divergence in the responses as to
what should be prescribed for in the regulations.
5

[Page 6]
11. Annex IV: Issue Note 4 The role and legal status of standards, recommendations (LTC) and
guidelines: The development of an appropriate mix of performance and procedure related standards must
be advanced, including an inclusive and transparent process for their development. At the same time, the
legal status of Commission’s “recommendations for the guidance of contractors” must be revisited under
the exploitation regime, and consideration given to the development of relevant “guidelines” under a
consensus-based approach.
12. Annex V: Issue Note 5 Broader environmental policy and the regulations. There has been much
discussion to date regarding the need for and development of a broader environmental policy framework
to deliver the objectives under article 145 of the Convention. The development and implementation of
regional environmental management plans, as part of that policy framework, are a key consideration. But
how and where such plans fit within the regulations requires clarification.
13. Annex VI: Issue Note 6 The roles of the Council, Secretary-General and the Legal and Technical
Commission in regulation: it is evident from stakeholder submissions that greater clarity, flowing from
the text of the regulations, is required around the respective roles of the different organs of the Authority
in relation to regulatory approvals and monitoring of compliance. This relates in particular to the balance
between the role of the Council and that of the Secretary-General.
14. The above themes, together with comments from stakeholders do and will continue to raise
questions and issues about the functioning of the Authority going forward, not least the resourcing of the
secretariat, development of a fit-for-purpose and cost-effective inspection mechanism, and the frequency
in meetings of the various organs. That is, there is an important interplay between the development of the
regulations and the institutional functioning and governance mechanisms in place required to administer
and manage implementation of the regulations. What the Authority seeks to regulate in accordance with
the Convention and how it will regulate in conjunction with sponsoring States, will impact its structure
and day to day functioning. Equally, the interface between other relevant international organizations, for
example, the International Maritime Organization, will need to be explored and finalized.
IV. Stakeholder responses to general and specific questions
15. This section of the note provides an overview of stakeholder responses to the general and specific
questions put forward by the secretariat in document ISBA/23/C/12. The discussion is not exhaustive, but
is intended to provide a flavour of the broad range of stakeholder responses. As highlighted above, the
Commission, with the assistance of the secretariat, will consider stakeholder responses in detail with a
view to delivering a revised set of draft regulations as soon as practicable after the Commission’s meeting
in March 2018.
General questions
16. Q1: Do the draft regulations follow a logical structure and flow? While a number of stakeholders
who commented on this question generally consider the structure of the draft regulations sufficiently clear
and logical, there is a general sentiment that the structure and flow of the regulations should be re-
examined to facilitate comprehension and implementation, with a focus on the end-users of the draft
regulations. Other comments include a need for a table of contents, and a flowchart for the application
and approval process for a plan of work. Some stakeholders make proposals for the re-ordering of the
6

[Page 7]
different parts making up the draft regulations. A restructure of the regulatory provisions is under
consideration, and will be presented to the Commission for discussion. However, it is evident from a
number of submissions that the various processes and workflows under the draft regulations are not
clearly understood as presented. To aid further discussion of the structure of the regulations (and in
connection with the transition between an exploration contract and exploitation contract), annex I to this
briefing note also contains an understanding of the proposed process for exploitation as presented in
appendix 1 to the Government of New Zealand’s submission.
17. Q2: Are the intended purpose and requirements of the regulatory provisions presented in a clear,
concise and unambiguous manner? A number of specific comments are made in connection with this
question. Some stakeholders consider that the preamble to the draft regulations should better
contextualize and reflect the objectives and intention of the Convention and the 1994 Agreement,
including: the mandate to operationalize principle of the common heritage of mankind; that activities are
conducted in accordance with sound commercial principles, and the obligation to ensure effective
protection of the marine environment. Some stakeholders request that the rights of contractors be clearly
stated in the text of the regulations. Other stakeholders note a need to define more clearly the procedural
steps involved in the development of the environmental impact statement, environmental management
and monitoring plan and closure plan. Stakeholders also note a need to develop specific environmental
thresholds and standards, and to develop specific guidance on the meaning and application of the
precautionary approach and ecosystem-based approach under the draft regulations. Some stakeholders
also wish to see clear guidance under the respective consultation processes and the role of the relevant
actors. A number of stakeholders seek clarification on the relationship between regional environmental
management plans and the regulation of exploitation activities and whether there is a need to clarify this
within the body of the regulations. Finally, comment is made on the level of documentation and detail that
will be made available to the Council following any recommendation for approval by the Commission of
an application for a plan of work
18. Q3: Is the content and terminology used and adopted in the draft regulations consistent and
compatible with the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1994
Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the Convention? Although there is a general
sentiment that the content and terminology in the regulations are consistent with the Convention and the
1994 Agreement, a number of specific points are raised by stakeholders. These include the introduction of
new terms such as “Good Industry Practice”, which requires clearer articulation, and that the definition of
serious harm should be based on best available science and the precautionary principle. Comments are
also made in the use of terms such as “reasonable” and “satisfied” across the draft, such terms being
considered vague and subjective. This is an inevitable use of drafting language, and while all regulatory
provisions will be scrutinized for clarity, the Authority’s future guidelines can elaborate on such terms
including, where applicable, from a policy perspective. Other terminologies stakeholders seek further
clarity on include “optimize”, “monopolize” and “effective control”. One area that draws a number of
comments from stakeholders is that of the legal status of the Commission’s recommendations. Some
stakeholders consider that such recommendations should not be binding, as they potentially introduce
uncertainty under an exploitation contract, while others consider that any recommendations should be
binding (particularly if they are to cover environmental thresholds and standards), with the Council
playing a role in endorsing such recommendations.
7

[Page 8]
19. Q4: Do the draft regulations provide for a stable, coherent and time-bound framework to
facilitate regulatory certainty for contractors to make the necessary commercial decisions in relation to
exploitation activities? It is acknowledged by stakeholders generally that the draft regulations are much
improved in terms of clearer timelines compared to the first working draft exploitation regulations issued
in July 2016. However, further work is required on some regulatory provisions to provide further
certainty / clarity in the decision-making process, including, where applicable, the option to extend
timelines. Equally, clarity is required on the different roles of the Council, Secretary-General and the
Commission as regards oversight in the regulatory process. Timelines and roles will need to be re-
examined and expressly incorporated so as to provide certainty under the regulatory evaluation and
decision-making processes. This may also drive the frequency of meetings of the various decision-making
organs of the Authority, and a need for delegated authorities to be put in place by the Council to support
the day-to-day regulatory functioning of the secretariat.
20. Q5: Is an appropriate balance achieved between the content of the regulations and that of the
contract? It is acknowledged in some submissions that under national jurisdictions there has been a move
away from a reliance on contract terms toward headline legislation and regulations. However, there is
some divergence in stakeholder views between the content of the regulations and that of the exploitation
contract, and that certain regulations, for example those relating to financial terms, should be included in
the contract. Other observations include a necessity for the regulatory framework to have high level
content that facilitates adaptability and evolution, but one that also provides sufficient certainty and
predictability.
21. Q6: Exploration regulations and regime: are there any specific observations or comments that
the Council or other stakeholders wish to make in connection with their experiences, or best practices
under the exploration regulations and process that would be helpful for the Authority to consider in
advancing the exploitation framework? A number of observations are made in connection with this
question and lessons learnt, including: ensuring transparency in the decision-making process; public
access to environmental data; consideration of resource-specific regulatory provisions, and the effect of
mining activities in the vicinity of other contract areas. Some stakeholders observe that the approach of
using guidance, rather than overburdening the regulations appears to have worked well.
Specific questions
22. Q1: Role of sponsoring States: draft regulation 91 provides for a number of instances in which
such States are required to secure the compliance of a contractor. What additional obligations, if any,
should be placed on sponsoring States to secure compliance by contractors that they have sponsored?
There are a number of diverging views in relation to the content of draft regulation 91, and the approach
taken to the role of sponsoring States under the regulations. Comments received include that while the list
of obligations identified in draft regulation 91 could be used as illustrative, the list is not exhaustive, and
that the general wording of draft regulation 91(b) could be sufficient to capture all obligations. Other
stakeholders considered it unnecessary to prescribe for sponsoring State obligations. On a more practical
level stakeholders do see a need for clarity in cooperation between the Authority and sponsoring State(s),
particularly in relation to monitoring and enforcement to avoid duplication. The sharing and
communication of information between the Authority and sponsoring State(s) is also seen as a key
element to be reflected in the regulations. In essence, there is a need to set out how the Authority and
8

[Page 9]
sponsoring State(s) will interact and co-operate in practice, and in co-ordination on information-sharing,
monitoring and enforcement. Comments are also made in connection with the need for sponsoring States
to be consulted in certain areas, for example in connection with the transfer of rights and obligations
under an exploitation contract. Furthermore, clarity is sought on the legal implications of one of multiple
sponsoring States terminating a sponsorship arrangement. Some of these points are addressed as part of
Issue Note 3 at annex III to this note.
23. Q2: Contract area: for areas within a contract area not identified as mining areas, what due
diligence obligations should be placed on a contractor as regards continued exploration activities? Such
obligations could include a programme of activities covering environmental, technical, economic studies
or reporting obligations (that is, activities and undertakings similar to those under an exploration
contract). Are the concepts and definitions of “contract area” and “mining area(s)” clearly presented in
the draft regulations? It is evident from stakeholder submissions that the regulations would benefit from
further clarity in the definitions for “contract area” and “mining area(s)”, and to consider incorporating a
definition of “Impact Area” to cover potentially affected areas falling outside a contract area. As to
continuing exploration activities within a contract area, these could be undertaken by reference to the
relevant exploration regulations. The draft regulations could however benefit from further clarity as to
what activities are being undertaken and where.
24. Q3: Plan of work: there appears to be confusion over the nature of a “plan of work” and its
relevant content. To some degree, this is the result of the use of terminology from the 1970s and 1980s in
the Convention. Some guidance is needed as to what information should be contained in the plan of work,
what should be considered supplementary plans and what should be annexed to an exploitation contract,
as opposed to what documentation should be treated as informational only for the purposes of an
application for a plan of work. Similarly, the application for the approval of a plan of work anticipates
the delivery of a pre-feasibility study: have contractors planned for this? Is there a clear understanding of
the transition from pre-feasibility to feasibility? While contractors have generally planned for a pre-
feasibility phase/study, stakeholders consider that the regulations are not sufficiently clear as to the
requirements and content of a feasibility study (and lacking an appropriate definition), and to the
Authority’s expectations on the transition between pre-feasibility and feasibility. Given the importance of
the plan of work, there is a need to clarify which documents should be annexed to a plan of work, and
accordingly annexed to an exploitation contract, including a mining plan (which was omitted in the draft
regulations). Some stakeholders consider that all information submitted as part of an application for a plan
of work should be annexed to an approved plan of work. Given a degree of confusion in this area, it
would, as a starting point, be beneficial to provide an understanding of the respective processes and
phases under exploration and exploitation (see Issue Note 1 at annex I).
25. Q4: Confidential information: this has been defined under draft regulation 75. There continue to
be diverging views among stakeholders as to the nature of “confidential information”, with some
stakeholders considering the provisions too broad, and others too narrow. It is proposed that a list that is
as exhaustive as possible be drawn up identifying non-confidential information. Do the Council and other
stakeholders have any other observations or comments in connection with confidential information or
confidentiality under the regulations? While the draft is welcomed by a number of stakeholders, concerns
are expressed in defining an objective standard (and mechanism) for determining confidential
information. Many stakeholders consider that a more meaningful and practical approach to this issue, is
9

[Page 10]
that a list of confidential information (rather than non-confidential information) should be drawn up for
consideration and presented to stakeholders (with a possible sense-checking by the Commission initially).
Some stakeholders also seek clarification in the procedures for designating information as confidential as
between a contractor and the Secretary-General, including the development of objective evaluation
criteria. Additionally, to allow the Council and other stakeholders visibility of any evaluation and to
facilitate consistent treatment across the contractor base, a general description of such information, and
the nature of such information should be provided. This is also considered important for the Council in
relation to its oversight and regulatory function. Conversely, a high importance is placed on the integrity
of confidential data, and the need for the Authority to be accountable for safeguarding such data. There
remains a general consensus on the public availability of environmental data and information and its
consequential sharing.
26. Q5: Administrative review mechanism: as highlighted in the Authority’s discussion paper No. 1,4
there may be circumstances in which, in the interests of cost and speed, an administrative review
mechanism could be preferable before proceeding to dispute settlement under Part XI, section 5, of the
Convention. This could be of particular relevance for technical disputes and determination by an expert
or panel of experts. What categories of disputes (in terms of subject matter) should be subject to such a
mechanism? How should experts be appointed? Should any expert determination be final and binding?
Should any expert determination be subject to review by, for example, the Seabed Disputes Chamber?
While there is some support for a more cost-effective route to the resolution of technical disputes, and that
this should be open for further discussion and consideration of alternatives as the core regulations are
developed, a number of stakeholders requested that such a mechanism be approached with caution given
the finely crafted dispute settlement provisions in the Convention, and access to existing arbitral
processes.
27. Q6: Use of exploitation contract as security: draft regulation 15 provides that an interest under
an exploitation contract may be pledged or mortgaged for the purpose of obtaining financing for
exploitation activities with the prior written consent of the Secretary-General. While this regulation has
generally been welcomed by investors, what additional safeguards or issues, if any, should the
Commission consider? It is evident from submissions that further work needs to be performed in respect
of this draft regulation 15, and the structure of any possible financing arrangements fully understood.
There is support in principle for this provision, but a number of comments by stakeholders should be
explored, including: a requirement of sponsoring State consent; location of any financial institution
outside a sponsoring State; factoring-in additional safeguards, and the required credentials of any
financial institution e.g. accords to the Equator principles. The issues raised by stakeholders on this
technically complex matter will be placed before the Commission for guidance.
28. Q7: Interested persons and public comment: for the purposes of any public comment process
under the draft regulations, the definition of “interested persons” has been questioned as being too
narrow. How should the Authority interpret the term “interested persons”? What is the role and
responsibility of sponsoring States in relation to public involvement? To what degree and extent should
the Authority be engaged in a public consultation process? Stakeholders generally support an inclusive
and transparent process. The term “stakeholder” is preferred to that of “interested person” in a number of
4 International Seabed Authority, “Dispute resolution considerations arising under the proposed new exploitation regulations”,
discussion paper No. 1. Available from: www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Pubs/DPs/DP1.pdf.
10

[Page 11]
responses, to encourage the widest possible public comments process. That said, some stakeholders do
note that the term should not be too broadly defined and / or limited to those with expertise in the specific
subject-matter. That said, submissions support a need for the development of a clear process and
procedure for consultation, including parameters for the degree of influence and weighting attaching to
public comments, and that the expectations of those choosing to make comments are properly managed.
What is less clear is the role of the sponsoring State in the consultation process and mechanism, and the
consultation activities required of applicants prior to making an application. Indeed, some stakeholders
advocate that stakeholder engagement should be led by the Authority to ensure a level playing field across
all applicants, although others note that this could lead to an unwarranted extension of the Authority’s
mandate into internal processes of member States.
11

[Page 12]
Annexures – Issue Notes
12

[Page 13]
Annex I transportation systems. contribute to a better
Consequently, under the understanding of and
Issue Note 1: exploitation contract there improvement to the structure
Understanding the pathway will be a further evaluation and content of the
to exploitation and beyond phase (feasibility) followed regulations.
by a construction and
1. This Issue Note 1 aims to 7. The Council may wish to
development phase leading to
advance a more fruitful consider the questions
the production phase and
discussion on the structure addressed at the London
ultimately closure of the
and content of the draft workshop in connection with
mining site. It is conceivable
regulations, by presenting the the structure of the draft
that contractors (applicants
respective workflows regulations, and to reflect on
for exploitation) will apply
envisaged under the draft the corresponding discussion
for a plan of work for
regulations, together with an output contained in the
exploitation over part of a
understanding of the workshop report.
contract area, whilst
transition between a pre-
continuing to explore and
feasibility stage and
evaluating the rest.
feasibility stage with
reference to polymetallic 4. Attachment 1 to this note
nodules. provides an overview of the
various phases and activities
2. The accepted definition of
toward the commercial
“exploration” contained in
mining of polymetallic
the exploration regulations
nodules. The draft regulations
anticipates an evaluation
have been developed to
stage (environmental,
reflect these phases, and
technical, economic and
consequential document
commercial factors) in
delivery.
addition to the searching for
and discovery of resources. 5. Attachment 2 to this note
The exploration regulations presents an extract of the
thus anticipate that the New Zealand Government’s
exploration phase will deliver understanding of the
pre-feasibility data and workflow processes reflected
information setting the stage under the draft regulations.
for the development of a
6. It is thought that a useful
DSM exploitation operation.
discussion can be had around
3. The definition of these attachments in order to
“exploitation” anticipates the facilitate a better
commercial recovery of understanding of the
resources, extraction of the processes and stages
minerals, and includes involved, and the transition
construction and operation of between exploration and
mining, processing and exploitation. This should
13

[Page 14]
Attachment 1 to Issue Note 1
Overview of Contractor Activities (Polymetallic nodules)
Under EXPLORATION Contract Under EXPLOITATION Contract
Contract
Contractor Indicative +- 5
activities
Exploration phase: +- 15 years continues
timings: years?
+- 3 years? +- 2 years? +- 20 years? + [x] years
in force
Feasibility Construction Production Commercial Prodn. Closure
Pre mE- bf
n
a
oe
a
sva
ns
sis
rs
ie
e
ti
ot
l
osb
u
in
sn
ri dl
mm
iei nt
y
,y
e
ge1
r
n
ns
i
ast
tt
nka
,a
d
g
l
e /
pin rd
oqE
i
gs
u
c
Et
ra
a.
as
l
t
atm
i met
.
c
y
d
tbi mn
i)o
a
v;e
e
is
f
tta
e
ier
+b
ele
s
i
sl
Pns
te
io
re
(
n
i
ea
u
s
og
.r
;r
r
g
e
c
mo
.Ea
e
f
tIos
eAc(
ni/
o
s
n
fi
tmg
t
of
io
ner rpa
rr
g
sird
o
)n
pe
e
n
g
ed
e
&
c
n/
if
t is
c
[Application
for
Approval
of
a
Plan
of ]
Work
for
Exploitation
Continued environmental
assessment.C MMo on
o
nt ni in
i tt
ou
o
re
r ii
nd
n
g
ge Px ap
ln
al do
n
r
m
&at ai Co
n
ln
oa sg
a uec rmt eiv
e
Pi nt lai te nus
nder Environmental Management and
management
FS required to raise
Feasibility stage (FS) investment capital
/ study (bankable)2 (probable / proven
reserve)
Infrastructure (e.g.
Construction
Mining vessel)
Production: ramp up
As pPer Feasibility
(commencement of
Study / Mining Plan
mining activities)
Commercial
As pPer FS / Mining Plan
production
Closure / Post As pPer Closure
closure monitoring Plan
1 A comprehensive study of the viability of a mineral project that: (a) has advanced to a stage where the mining method has been established and where an effective method of
mineral processing has been determined; and (b) includes a financial analysis based on reasonable assumptions of technical, engineering, legal, operating and economic factors and
the evaluation of other relevant factors sufficient for a suitably qualified and experienced qualified person to determine, within reason, whether all or part of the mineral resource
may be classified as a mineral reserve (ISBA/21/LTC/15).
2 A comprehensive study of a mineral deposit in which all geological, engineering, legal, operating, economic, social, environmental and other relevant factors are considered in
such detail that it may reasonably serve as the basis for a final decision by a financial institution to finance the development of the deposit for mineral production
(ISBA/21/LTC/15).
14

[Page 15]
Attachment 2 to Issue Note 1 - Applicant may revise documents in response to - Environmental Performance review submitted
comments within 60 days within 6 months of start of 2nd, 5th and 10th years
Understanding of the proposed process for - Commission considers application at next meeting following commencement
exploitation under the regulations5 and can request additional information from - Exploitation contract will provide for a review
applicant between the SG and the contractor of the activities
Pre-application activities under a Plan of Work (not greater than 5 years). This
- Applicant must respond to any information request
- Applicant provides scoping report in accordance may result in modifications to be approved by the
within 90 days
with information requirements (Annex IV) Commission and Council.
- Scoping report published and comments invited Decision-making process
Modifications and Renewal
- Commission considers at next meeting and - Commission provides report and recommendations
- An applicant can request to amend or modify its
provides comments to Council based on criteria (in accordance with draft
application in light of new knowledge or information
regulation 7, 10 and 21)
- Applicant may revise scoping report at any time prior to consideration of the
- Applicant can make representations within 90 days
Commission’s report by the Council or any time
Application to undertake exploitation if notified by Commission that it does not meet the prior to the execution of an exploitation contract.
- Applicant undertakes an EIA to inform EIS criteria
- Only minor or administrative changes are allowed
- Applicant applies for approval of Plan of Work and - Report of Commission published
to a Plan of Work annexed to a contract, otherwise
provides the following: - Council considers report and recommendations at approval must be sought from the Commission and
 Pre-feasibility study (in accordance with next meeting (in accordance with criteria in Council under regulations 10 and 11.
information requirements in Annex II) UNCLOS Art 162)
- The contractor may renew its contract for periods
 EIS (in accordance with Annex V) not more than 10 years. If the SG determines the
Pre-commencement requirements
 Financing Plan (in accordance with Annex III) Contractor is in compliance with the conditions set
- At least 12 months prior to production, contractor
out in draft regulation 10 of the Standard Clauses for
 Emergency response and contingency plan (in provides feasibility study, revised financing plan, a
exploitation contract, the contract is renewed on the
accordance with Annex VI) revised EMMP and a revised CP
same terms and conditions.
 Health, safety and maritime security plan - EMMP and CP published and comments invited
 Training plan - Applicant may revise documents in response to Close-out requirements
 EMMP (in accordance with Annex VII) comments within 60 days - Contractor submits final CP for approval one year
- Commission considers at next meeting and may prior to cessation of activities
 Closure Plan (in accordance with Annex VIII)
approve or recommend amendments as a condition - CP published and comments invited
 Administrative fee ( in accordance with Annex for approval
- Contractor may revise CP in response to comments
II)
- Approved plans published and contractor notified within 60 days
- EIS, EMMP and CP published and comments
- Commission considers at next meeting and may
invited Monitoring and review
approve or recommend amendments as a condition
- Activities undertaken in accordance with EMMP
for approval
and contract
- Contractor continues to monitor after cessation for
5 Extracted from Appendix I of New Zealand’s period set out in CP
submission to the draft regulations.
15

[Page 16]
Annex II include that the system of payments and the rate of
payments to the Authority payments (though no royalty
Issue Note 2: The payment should be fair to both the rates have been specified under
mechanism contractor and to the Authority; the draft regulations). As
that the rates of payment should highlighted in ISBA/23/LTC/6
1. Developing a system of be within the range prevailing such terms are offered as the
payments (or payment in respect of land-based mining basis for further discussion
mechanism) that delivers a fair of the same or similar minerals within the Council,
and equitable return to the in order to avoid giving deep Commission and relevant
common heritage of mankind, seabed miners an artificial stakeholder base. A further
balances commercial interests competitive advantage or financial model is now under
and supports technological imposing on them a development through a multi-
development and change is one competitive disadvantage, and disciplinary team at the
of the most challenging aspects that the system should not be Massachusetts Institute of
of regulatory development. complicated and should not Technology. This project was
impose major administrative commissioned by the
2. The Convention articulates a
costs on the Authority or on Secretariat to deliver a robust
number of objectives that the
contractors. and independent financial
Authority must be guided by in
model for use by the Authority
negotiating financial terms 4. The payment mechanism
in developing financial terms .
under an exploitation contract,6 represents one element of the
It is hoped that a discussion
including: to ensure optimum financial obligations to be
paper to advance the
revenues for the Authority from imposed by the regulatory
development of such terms
the proceeds of commercial regime, and one which is yet to
will be issued prior to the July
production; to attract be fully developed.
2018 Annual Session of the
investments and technology to
Authority.
the exploration and exploitation 5. Attachment 1 to this Issue
of the Area; to ensure equality Note V provides an overview 6. It should be noted that not all
of financial treatment and of the development of financial stakeholders endorse a pure
comparable financial terms to date through a series of royalty driven approach, and
obligations, and to provide studies and workshops over the that there should be a link to
incentives for contractors to last 4 years, reflecting a range profitability and / or a
undertake joint arrangements of views and leading to the progressive mechanism. Further
with the Enterprise and presentation of a financial consideration of this has not
developing or their nationals. model in 2017, and financial been dismissed. However, this
term provisions in the draft
must also be viewed in the light
3. The 1994 Implementation regulations (Part VII). These
of the tension that exists
Agreement introduced a provisions include: a
between that of economic
number of principles to guide mechanism for calculating the
efficiency and that of
the development of a future royalty base (on a given
administrative efficiency
system of payments.7 These “basket of metals” scenario);
(challenges in information
anticipate a first and second
collection and transparency in
6 Article 13(1), Annex III of the period of commercial that information). Equally,
Convention. production, and provide for the
there also needs to be a level
7 Section 8, Annex, 1994
review of the system of
Implementation Agreement.
16

[Page 17]
playing field, with different other ways or methods of
contractor entities potentially working does the Council
engaging in mining activities consider appropriate to
(States, State enterprises, ensure that respective
private investors). interests in the
development of a payment
7. To date there has been
mechanism be properly
support for a transitional
addressed, discussed and
mechanism until such time as
integrated (with due regard
the economics of the industry
to the objectives of the
are better understood. There is
Convention and the 1994
also a need to develop such a
Agreement)? For example,
mechanism that provides
should an ad hoc expert
reasonable certainty and
working group
predictability.
(representative) be formed
to work with MIT under the
8. Additionally, there is also the
guidance of the
question of how to determine
Commission to develop the
an annual fixed fee
ISA financial model
contemplated by the 1994
further?
Implementing Agreement, its
purpose and rationale, and
principles for its calculation,
including resource-specific
considerations.
9. A discussion within the
Council would be beneficial
toward identifying aspects or
concerns relating to the
payment mechanism that
require closer examination by
the Commission.
10. To this end, the Council
may wish to consider:
(a) What do member States
want a payment mechanism
to do?
(b) What advice and guidance
can the Council provide to
the Commission to achieve
the desired outcome?
(c) In addition to the work of
the Commission, what
17

[Page 18]
Attachment 1 to Issue Note 2
Overview of workshops and studies on the development of financial terms
2013 ISA Technical Study 11: Towards the Development of a This technical study presents a comprehensive overview of ISA Technical Study No. 11
Regulatory Framework for Polymetallic Nodule Exploitation the background and drivers of a regulatory framework. It
in the Area also incorporates a discussion around a fiscal regime.
2014 Developing Financial Terms for Deep Sea Mining An independent study commissioned by the secretariat to Developing Financial Terms for Deep
Exploitation compare mining industry fiscal regimes and comparable Sea Mining Exploitation
royalty and other taxes.
2015 ISA Discussion Paper on the Development and Paper issued by the secretariat to stimulate discussion on ISA Discussion Paper
Implementation of a Payment Mechanism in the Area the development of financial terms, and the administration Stakeholder responses to ISA
and management thereof. Discussion Paper
2015 Mineral exploitation in the Area, Joint CIL-ISA Workshop This workshop discussed and provided a proposed path, ISA Briefing Paper
(Singapore, 2015)8 with a transitional regime of an annual fixed fee and a
royalty for a period of time, then a review.
2016 (May) Deep Seabed Mining Payment Regime #1 (San Diego) This workshop began to explore in more detail the Workshop report
proposed transitional mechanism. It also looked at the
points considered by the ISA Discussion Paper issued in
2015. The workshop also explored environmental
incentives.
2016 Deep Seabed Mining Payment Regime #2 (London) This workshop was a precursor to the development of a Workshop report
(December) working financial model; discussion centred on the cost
component lines of such a model, and on the anticipated
value chain.
2017 (April) Deep Seabed Mining Payment Regime #3 (Singapore) This workshop explored and discussed the principles and Workshop report
assumptions underlying a working model as presented to
workshop participants.
8 Discussions continued at a further workshop directed toward transparency in Bellagio late 2016. Report available at: http://www.resolv.org/site-dsm/files/2016/09/Toward-
Transparency-and-Best-Practices-For-Deep-Seabed-Mining-Final-Report.pdf.
18

[Page 19]
Annex III 4. To date there has been little 5. The due diligence obligation
in the way of formal dialogue of the sponsoring States to take
Issue Note 3: The role of between the Authority and all appropriate measures under
the Sponsoring State(s) sponsoring States to address the Convention was discussed
this matter. In 2015, the at length by the Seabed
1. Sponsoring State(s) and the Commission addressed this Disputes Chamber in 2011
Authority – a clear division of matter as a “High level issue” (ITLOS Case No.17). The
duties and responsibilities in and noted: Assembly has also requested
managing and regulating the Secretary-General “to
sponsored activities in the “It is not believed that provide the Council with a
Area? the division of duties comparative study of the
and responsibilities is
existing national legislation
2. One area that raised concern clearly defined between
with a view to deriving
in prior stakeholder a sponsoring State and
common elements therefrom
consultations was the lack of the Authority. This before the end of 2018.”10
sufficient reference to the relates to matters
involvement of the sponsoring including enforcement 6. It is for the Authority to set
State. Draft regulation 91 of the and monitoring / the necessary standards for
present draft regulations was inspection, offence and activities in the Area with the
crafted in an attempt to better penalty systems, sponsoring State making
reflect the obligation on a liability and reference to those standards in
sponsoring State(s) to take all responsibility of a its national rules. It is also open
necessary measures to secure contractor etc. From a to sponsoring States to
contractor compliance with a contractor’s prescribe higher standards
number of obligations under the perspective there is the under national rules as regards
draft regulations. potential for a environmental protection.
duplicative regulatory
3. Recent stakeholder 7. From a practical perspective,
and financial burden.
submissions reflect a the Council may wish to focus
This needs to be
divergence in views as to its discussion around the
clarified and duties and
whether such obligations following questions:
responsibilities more
should be prescribed for in a set
clearly defined.
of regulations that regulates (a) To what extent, if any, and
Equally, this also
principally the relationship what obligations should be
points to effective co-
between a contractor and the placed on sponsoring States
operation between the
Authority. Nevertheless, there under the draft regulations?
Authority and a
is a common understanding that (b) What obligations should
sponsoring State.
the role of the sponsoring State the Authority have toward
Matrix setting out
as regards co-operation and sponsoring States under the
duties and
collaboration with the regulations e.g. access to
responsibilities to be
Authority, does need to be information (confidential or
developed.”9
clarified and clearly addressed
in the regulations, including the
Stakeholder responses to the Report to
exchange of relevant 9 Draft framework, High level issues Members of the Authority and all
information and data. and Action plan, Version II 15 July stakeholders issued 23 March 2015).
2015 (Reviewed and revised for 10 ISBA/23/A/13.
19

[Page 20]
otherwise), joint consents, enterprise and any third
where applicable? party contractor)? This
(c) How should the division of relationship may be of
duties and responsibilities interest to Authority in
between a sponsoring State determining the suitability
(or State) and the Authority of any exploitation
be addressed in practice? application – financial
(There is also a related capability and technical
issue of the jurisdictional capability in particular.
competencies of and (h) What of the disclosure of
cooperation with other the reasons for any
State actors, including flag termination of sponsorship?
States). Would a matrix of (i) What guidance should the
duties and responsibilities Authority provide to
be helpful initially? How sponsoring States on the
should the relationship assessment and evaluation
between the Authority and of exploitation applications,
sponsoring State(s) be ongoing monitoring and
formalized? compliance? How are
(d) What of any monetary standards (operational,
penalties levied by a safety, environmental) to
sponsoring State or the be consistently applied in
Authority in respect of any the Area to ensure a level
contract or other playing field?
violations? Is there a (j) What specifics must be
hierarchy or primacy? addressed where there are 2
What of the possibility of a or more sponsoring States?
dual penalty system – (k) Should a workshop be
fairness and equity? convened between
(e) Monitoring, compliance sponsoring States, State
and enforcement contractors and the
mechanisms– e.g. Authority? What should be
reporting, inspection. The the timing of this?
possibility of duplication
and additional costs placed
on contractors?
(f) Exchange of information:
what, when and how?
(g) What of the disclosure of
any arrangements between
the above parties between a
sponsoring State(s) and a
sponsored contractor (and
that between a State, State
20

[Page 21]
Annex IV and in the implementation of 5. Currently, the draft
the regulations and monitoring regulations make a number of
Issue Note 4: The role and performance. Consequently, in references to the Authority’s
legal status of standards, 2015, the Commission “guidelines”, “applicable
recommendations (LTC) identified the importance of standards”, “generally
standard development. Many accepted…standards” and to
and guidelines
standards developed in parallel “Recommendations”12. The
1. The Authority’s legal industries will be directly status and content of these
framework for the regulation of applicable to mining activities terms require re-visiting (or
activities in the Area, and the in the Area; others will require further guidance provided) in
relative hierarchy of the adaptation together with the order that regulatory certainty
different instruments employed, development of Area-specific is achieved.
can be summarized simply as standards.
6. Indeed, in connection with
follows:
4. The issue of standards, the “recommendations for the
recommendations and guidance of contractors” a more
UNCLOS /
1994 guidelines was also considered fundamental issue arises as to
Agreement
in the “Discussion Paper on the the legal basis for the making
development and drafting of of such recommendations under
Regulations Regulations on Exploitation for the Convention. Article 165 of
Mineral Resources in the Area the Convention makes no
(Environmental Matters)”and a reference to the Commission’s
Standards number of questions identified. power to make
The matter was explored recommendations directly to
further at the workshop held in contractors. Recommendations
Guidelines Berlin in March 201711 in are to be made solely to the
relation to environmental Council. It is understandable
management. The workshop that some stakeholders now
2. Annex III, article 17(1) of identified inter alia a need to consider that incorporating
the Convention stipulates a define the term “standards”, such “recommendations” into
number of matters in respect of and to determine the the exploitation regulations
which the Authority must adopt appropriate mix of performance could give rise to legal
and uniformly apply rules, standards (e.g. environmental uncertainty and instability in
regulations and procedures. thresholds set out in a plan of the regulatory regime,
Article 17(1)(b)(xii) work) and procedural (or particularly if the
specifically refers to “mining process) standards (e.g. ISO recommendations are changed
standards, and practices, 14001:2015). or updated frequently.
including those relating to
7. Therefore, the current system
operational safety, conservation
11 ISA Technical Study No. 17: Report
and process of issuing
of the resources and the of an International Workshop
protection of the marine convened by the German Environment “recommendations” should be
Agency (UBA), the German Federal
environment”.
Institute for Geosciences and Natural
Resources (BGR), and the Secretariat 12 Draft regulation 80 permits the
3. “Standards” will play an of the International Seabed Authority Commission to issue recommendations
(ISA) in Berlin, Germany, 20-24 of a technical or administrative nature
extremely important role under,
March 2017. for the guidance of contractors.
21

[Page 22]
re-visited under the exploitation guidance of contractors
regulations. A focus on under the exploitation
standard development and framework.
relevant “Authority guidelines”
to provide guidance in respect
of specific subject matters and
areas is needed.
8. The above lends itself to a
dedicated workshop to
consider:
(a) An operating framework
for reviewing, developing
and integrating DSM-
related standards in the
Area, through a consensus
and transparent based
approach;
(b) The requirements and
content of performance and
process-related standards
potentially applicable to
DSM;
(c) What “guidelines” the
Authority should put in
place;
(d) The mandatory versus
voluntary status of such
standards and guidelines
under the regulatory
framework; and
(e) The role of the Council in
endorsing such standards
and guidelines.
9. To facilitate discussion, the
Council may wish to reflect on:
(a) Principles for a process for
the development of
standards and guidance;
(b) A re-examination of the
role of the Commission’s
recommendations for the
22

[Page 23]
Annex V 3. However, what is not clear is submission to the draft
the extent to which such regulations, Germany has
Issue Note 5: Broader environmental policy suggested that a time limit
environmental policy and framework should be reflected could be placed on the
the regulations in the draft regulations, not development of REMPs which
least as the latter is designed could solve the potential
1. Following on from principally to implement Annex problem where no REMPs are
stakeholder submissions to the III of the Convention by under development.
draft regulations, and the output regulating the application
6. The United Kingdom
from the workshop held in process and establishing the
submission to the draft
Berlin in March 2017 in rights and obligations of
regulations also provides a
relation to the Authority’s contractors vis-a-vis the
number of examples on how
strategy for environmental Authority.
management13, the cooperative and collaborative
4. Concern has been expressed working can prove beneficial.
development of a policy
by some stakeholders that the
framework for the
7. The Council may wish to
text of the draft regulations
implementation of article 145
consider:
makes no reference to either the
of the Convention is
development and content of
paramount. This includes the (a) The need for, and content
REMPs or to their relationship
(further) development of of an environmental policy
to the application process and
regional environmental framework;
on-going environmental
management plans (REMPs) as (b) How such a framework,
management obligations.
called for by the Council. particularly that of REMPs,
Others take the view that while
should be incorporated into
2. Document ISBA/24/C/3 the development and
the draft regulations?
(Preliminary strategy for the implementation of REMPs do
development of not need to be prescribed for in
regional environmental the regulations, there does need
management plans for the to be a clearer understanding of
Area) provides a background to the link and relationship
and discussion of the between REMPs and the
development of REMPs, Authority’s broader
together with a short-term environmental policy.
strategy proposal and
5. Some stakeholders have
recommendations for
advocated that REMPs should
consideration by the Council.
be implemented prior to the
issue of exploitation contracts.
However, there remains a
13 ISA Technical Study No. 17: Report
practical consideration of the
of an International Workshop
convened by the German Environment time required for the
Agency (UBA), the German Federal development of REMPs, and
Institute for Geosciences and Natural
the need for data and
Resources (BGR), and the Secretariat
of the International Seabed Authority information to support their
(ISA) in Berlin, Germany, 20-24
development. In their
March 2017.
23

[Page 24]
Annex VI sets out the roles of the (c) Should decisions (some or
Council, Secretary-General and all) be provisional until
Issue Note 6: The roles of the Commission as provided for validated by the Council?
the Council, Secretary- under the Convention.
General and the Legal and
4. Except in connection with
Technical Commission in
those aspects of the role of the
implementing the
Secretary-General (supported
regulations
by technical and legal staff
within the secretariat function)
1. First, there remain a number
that have been clarified under
of references to “the Authority”
the exploration regulations,
in the draft regulations. This
there needs to be an
flows not least from Annex III
understanding of the specific
to the Convention with its
authorities afforded to the
many references to “the
Secretary-General under the
Authority”. As the draft
Convention and the draft
regulations are revised, the
regulations. This is key to the
relevant provisions should
orderly implementation of the
make it clear which organ of
regulations vis-à-vis
the Authority is specifically
contractors, and effective day-
responsible for undertaking a
to-day functioning of the
particular action or decision-
Authority as a regulator.
making.
Equally, the regulatory
2. Secondly, as highlighted by a framework must ensure that the
number of stakeholders, there Council is provided with the
are a number of references in necessary oversight to execute
the draft regulations to actions its duty to exercise control over
or decisions being undertaken activities in the Area in
by the Secretary-General accordance with article 153.
without formal recourse to the
5. Accordingly, the Council
Council. This includes, for
may wish to consider:
example, the acceptance of a
feasibility study (draft (a) As a matter of policy, what
regulation 29) and the renewal functions and levels of
of a contract (draft regulation authority should be
13). delegated to the Secretary-
General by the Council?
3. In connection with the
(b) What guidance should be
monitoring of compliance with
provided with regard to the
plans of work for exploration,
approach to decision-
document ISBA/24/C/4
making by the Secretary-
(Information relating to
General?
compliance by contractors with
plans of work for exploration)
24