[Page 1]
ISBA
International Seabed Authority /25/C/29
Council
Distr.: General
27 June 2019
Original: English
Twenty-fifth session
Council session, part II
Kingston, 15–19 July 2019
Agenda item 11
Draft regulations for exploitation of mineral resources in
the Area
Comments on the draft regulations on exploitation of mineral
resources in the Area
Submitted by the delegation of Germany
I. Introduction
1. Germany has taken note of the third draft of the regulations on exploitation of
mineral resources in the Area (ISBA/25/C/WP.1) and acknowledges the significant
progress made by the secretariat of the International Seabed Authority and the Legal
and Technical Commission in further developing the draft regulations.
2. However, a number of substantial issues still require clarification and would
benefit from further discussion, as their resolution is, in our view, essential for
achieving a balanced regulatory approach.
II. Main issues
3. We have identified five comprehensive issues that we consider critical going
forward.
A. Standards and guidelines
4. The present section touches primarily upon draft regulations 11, 45, 94 and 95,
as well as annexes IV, VII and VIII.
Legal nature of standards and guidelines
5. Germany firmly believes that standards must be legally binding, while
guidelines may be recommendatory. We favour a legal interpretation that would
permit the Authority to employ guidelines as a compliance-inducing instrument so
19-10997 (E) 080719
*1910997*

[Page 2]
ISBA/25/C/29
that the outcome may be presumed legally sound in cases where a contractor can
demonstrate compliance with those guidelines.
No exploitation prior to the adoption of relevant standards
6. Germany considers it critically important that the Authority not permit any
exploitation activities unless the relevant standards, whether environmental or other,
have been adopted. Deciding upon applications for exploitation before the finalization
of relevant standards would introduce a risk of non-compliance with article 145 of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and impose an unfair regulatory
risk on the applicant or contractor, and could cast doubt on the overall legitimacy of
the licence.
Need for a structured, transparent, inclusive and comprehensive road map for the
prioritized development of specific standards
7. At the time of writing, the workshop on the development of standards and
guidelines for the mining code held in Pretoria from 13 to 15 May 2019 had resulted
in a list of 14 standards, with the suggestion that they be developed before the draft
regulations are adopted. In view of the road map of the secretariat for the adoption of
the regulations, as well as the usual capacity, resources and time needed for the
development of standards by international standard-setting institutions, a joint effort
is required. The prioritized standards must also be developed in a structured manner,
since there may be interferences between certain standards. On the other hand,
however, the order in which the standards are discussed may also create synergies.
The importance of coordination among the various actors is highlighted by the fact
that different bodies may be responsible for developing different standards or groups
of standards. Lastly, in order to ensure the scientific quality and legitimacy of the
standards, the process of developing standards and guidelines should in general be
transparent and open to all stakeholders, including industry representatives and
environmental non-governmental organizations.
Continuing lack of specific environmental standards in the current draft regulations
on the environmental impact assessment, the environmental management and
monitoring plan and the closure plan
8. Currently, the environmental impact assessment requirements are those to be
addressed descriptively by the contractor and lack specific assessment criteria with
quantitative environmental thresholds, such as for harmful effects, or, alternatively,
methodologies to develop thresholds. Clear and measurable requirements are
recommended in the periodic review undertaken pursuant to article 154 of the
Convention and the related reports, not least because agreed thresholds ensure a level
playing field for contractors. Thresholds are needed, for example, for seabed habitats
that have been affected and for sediment plumes, whether operational plumes at the
seafloor level or discharge plumes at mid-water depths or deeper.
Need for clear differentiation of types and categories of standards
9. Germany supports the distinction between process and performance standards,
as proposed to the Council in the first part of its session, in February/March 2019.
However, both terms are inadequate to describe criteria and thresholds for
environmental quality status, which represent a third category of standards. Examples
of such criteria include the rates of bioturbation of surface sediments, an index of
benthic meiofauna biodiversity and the oxygen concentrations at certain sediment
depths.
2/7 19-10997

[Page 3]
ISBA/25/C/29
Interplay between environmental standards, guidelines and technology
10. Germany considers that environmental standards and guidelines should include
requirements and references regarding the technology to be used. These requirements
should also be flexible where contractors can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Authority that other kinds of technology are equally well equipped to ensure the same
outcome.
B. Regional environmental management plans
11. The present section touches primarily upon draft regulations 2, 15, 20, 31, 38,
47, 48, 49, 52, 58, 60 and 76, as well as annexes IV, VII and VIII.
Legal nature of regional environmental management plans
12. Germany considers that the provisions of a regional environmental management
plan should be binding and implemented both through explicit decisions of the
Council when adopting the plan and through an obligation in the regulations on
exploitation that the environmental impact statement, the environmental management
and monitoring plan and the closure plan comply with the regional environmental
management plan.
No exploitation without regional environmental management plans
13. Germany believes that it is necessary to establish a regional environmental
management plan to ensure the effective protection of the marine environment from
harmful effects that may arise from activities in the Area. Germany therefore suggests
that the granting of exploitation licences be contingent upon the existence of fully
developed and agreed regional environmental management plans. However, it should
also be ensured that the granting of exploitation licenses cannot be prevented by
simply blocking the further development and adoption of the related plans.
Implications of plans
14. Germany believes that it should be clarified that regional environmental
management plans will entail requirements mandatory for the approval of plans of
work. For example, vulnerable ecosystems in the regions concerned need to be
identified and protected as part of such plans before mining contracts are granted,
ideally before specific areas are designated for exploration.
Regional environmental management plans and the precautionary approach
15. Germany believes that it must be ensured that the development of regional
environmental management plans and the designation of areas of particular
environmental interest are science-driven. Given the limited scientific knowledge
available for most deep-sea habitats, the precautionary approach must be the starting
point and basic principle for the development of any such plan.
Development and approval of regional environmental management plans
16. Germany holds the view that the Authority currently lacks a general strategy for
the development and approval of regional environmental management plans. Before
further analysing resource- and region-specific needs for environmental planning, it
is necessary to agree on the basic requirements and procedures for the plans. This step
includes defining the legal status of the plans and their provisions, the role of relevant
regional organizations and other competent international bodies, the requirements and
criteria for developing networks of protected areas and the regionalization of
19-10997 3/7

[Page 4]
ISBA/25/C/29
environmental standards and thresholds. As announced to the Council during the first
part of its session, Germany is scheduled to host an international workshop on the
development of a standardized approach to these plans in Hamburg, Germany, from
11 to 13 November 2019.
C. Adaptive management
17. The present section touches primarily upon draft regulation 48 and annex VII.
Concept of adaptive management
18. Germany considers that an in-depth discussion of the concept of “adaptive
management” is urgently needed. Contractors have a vested interest under the
contract with the Authority. A legal challenge may arise if contracts are amended as a
result of recommendations, decisions or guidelines issued by the Authority and
additional obligations for the contractors are introduced. In principle, exploitation
contracts should only be amended by agreement and with the consensus of the
contracting parties. In cases where unilateral amendments are necessary, such
amendments should be binding but undertaken in a balanced manner. An effective
concept of adaptive management should be developed and established to balance the
various interests. Criteria and procedures for adaptive management to modify
approved plans of work according to emerging scientific knowledge and technology
should be defined precisely in the draft regulations. Currently, however, adaptive
management is required only in very general terms under the provisions for the
environmental management and monitoring plan (see annex VII to the regulations),
and only as an obligation for the contractor. Germany takes a much broader view of
the concept of adaptive management and would specifically like to discuss giving an
active regulatory role to the Authority and specific procedures for implementing the
precautionary approach in this respect.
D. Test mining
19. The present section touches upon draft regulations 7 and 92, among others.
Germany proposes the establishment of a new set of regulations.
No exploitation prior to successful test mining
20. Germany reiterates that licensed and successfully conducted test mining should
be made a legal prerequisite for any application for exploitation in the geographical
area concerned, as well as a mandatory requirement for the approval of a plan of work.
Provisions to this effect should be included explicitly in the draft regulations. The
conditions, requirements and procedures under which test mining is to be conducted,
such as the environmental impact assessment requirement, monitoring requirements,
disclosure of scientific results and certification of equipment, should be regulated
under a separate set of regulations, for example, in a dedicated part of the regulations
on exploitation.
E. Monitoring
21. The present section touches primarily upon the draft provisions of sections 2
and 4 of part IV, as well as annexes IV, VII and VIII.
4/7 19-10997

[Page 5]
ISBA/25/C/29
Monitoring during the initial phase of exploitation
22. Germany considers that the draft regulations should include a provision
requiring independent monitoring for a set period of time, such as the first seven years
of operations.
Monitoring and provisions for environmental impact assessments
23. The draft provisions relating to environmental impact assessments lack specific
and measurable requirements to be met by the contractor. Germany recommends the
development of a separate manual for monitoring and assessment activities before,
during and after the exploitation phase. The manual could include detailed
methodologies for establishing environmental baselines. Only on the basis of
standardized data collection can any changes, including the loss of biodiversity, be
appropriately detected and reasonable mitigating efforts initiated.
Monitoring of test mining operations
24. Germany recommends the establishment of an independent and legally binding
scientific monitoring strategy to validate the environmental impact of test mining
operations, with monitoring conducted partly or completely by third parties.
III. Specific issues
25. In addition to the main issues mentioned above, we wish to raise the following
points in relation to specific regulations. Most of these issues were already mentioned
in our submission of 4 October 20181 regarding document ISBA/24/LTC/WP.1/Rev.1:
(a) The Sustainable Development Goals adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should be
mentioned as a leading principle for mining operations in the Area (see draft
regulation 2);
(b) In accordance with draft regulation 11, only the environmental plans
should be placed on the Authority’s website. However, it must be ensured that general
information on the projects, in particular with regard to the exploitation techniques,
is made accessible, so that the public may be able to comment on the environmental
plans. In this connection, it is important that the requirements pertaining to the
environmental impact statements regarding the provision of information on such
aspects as project viability, mineral resource and mining technology be sufficiently
clear (see annex IV, paras. 1 and 3, to the regulations);
(c) It should be clarified in the relevant provision that the right to conduct
marine scientific research is not curtailed by the exclusivity rights under an
exploitation contract (see draft regulation 18);
(d) Before the commencement of commercial production, contractors should
be required to revise the environmental plans in particular. Thereafter, only the
revised parts should be considered by the Commission and finally approved by the
Council. In the case of substantial changes, the public must be involved in this
approval procedure (see draft regulation 25, para. 1);
(e) Concerning the modification of a plan of work, we believe that the
Commission and the Council need to be involved in the decision as to whether there
is a “material change” (see draft regulations 25, para. 1, and 57, para. 2);
__________________
1 Available at www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Regs/2018/Comments/Germany.pdf.
19-10997 5/7

[Page 6]
ISBA/25/C/29
(f) Any incentives for contractors (see draft regulation 63) should only be
provided if fully in line with the principles under draft regulation 2;
(g) Concerning the confidentiality of information, we consider it necessary to
establish unambiguous definitions of the information that should be considered
confidential or public. Maximum transparency must be ensured in the proposed
designation procedures. It should be possible to trace an entity in possession of
information designated as confidential in order to enable access to that information
where authorization is granted at a later date (see draft regulation 89);
(h) The question remains as to whether the distinction between obligations of
the Authority and complementary or residual obligations of national authorities is
clear and consistent in draft regulations 32, 37 and 53, among others. There are also
open questions relating to the resources, personnel and finances of the Authority in
this regard;
(i) Germany strongly recommends that at least the Council have an opt-in
possibility for stimulating and influencing the scope, establishment and/or issuance
of guidance documents (see draft regulation 95);
(j) As suggested in our submission of 2018, the financial plan should include
a cost-benefit analysis demonstrating that the plan of work will allow for a net benefit
and should take account of costs to mitigate any impacts on the marine environment
(see annex III to the regulations). Germany proposes that an initial discussion on
potential approaches be held in the Finance Committee;
(k) The Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources of Germany,
a contractor, based its environmental impact assessment for the collector vehicle test
in the German licensed area on the structure of the environmental impact statement
template in annex IV. We found the subdivision into sections according to
methodology, that is, geological setting, physical oceanographic setting and chemical
oceanographic setting, adequate for describing the existing environment in sections 4
and 5, but impractical for describing potential impacts in the different parts of the
water column and on the seafloor. For example, the spread and impact of an
operational discharge plume and its subsequent deposition includes sedimentological,
chemical and oceanographic components that have a combined effect on the
environment. In our view, it would be better to work with categories of potential
impacts, which would include the operational sediment plumes mentioned in
paragraph 8, in order to provide detailed descriptions of the scale of the impacts and
the mitigation measures required to minimize them (see annex IV to the regulations);
(l) Certain terms also need to be clearly defined, including “best
environmental practices”, “best available scientific evidence” and “best available
techniques”. With regard to the last term, we recommend replacing the current
6/7 19-10997

[Page 7]
ISBA/25/C/29
definition (see schedule 1 to the regulations) with the definition established in the
European Union industrial emissions directive;2
(m) On a general note, we question the use of the phrase “use their best
endeavours” in various sections of the draft regulations, as it does not strike us as the
clearest and most practically feasible level of care.
__________________
2 See Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010
on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control), article 3, paragraph 10,
namely:
“‘best available techniques’ means the most effective and advanced stage in the
development of activities and their methods of operation which indicates the practical
suitability of particular techniques for providing the basis for emission limit values and
other permit conditions designed to prevent and, where that is not practicable, to reduce
emissions and the impact on the environment as a whole:
(a) ‘techniques’ includes both the technology used and the way in which the
installation is designed, built, maintained, operated and decommissioned;
(b) ‘available techniques’ means those developed on a scale which allows
implementation in the relevant industrial sector, under economically and technically viable
conditions, taking into consideration the costs and advantages, whether or not the
techniques are used or produced inside the Member State in question, as long as they are
reasonably accessible to the operator;
(c) ‘best’ means most effective in achieving a high general level of protection of
the environment as a whole.”
19-10997 7/7