[Page 2]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
2

[Page 3]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Contents Page
Section
/ item
I Background to the development of the working 4
draft Environmental regulations
1. Introduction 4
2. Disclaimer 4
3. The Role of the Authority in regulatory development 5
4. The Draft and Drafting Approach 6
5. Cost structure 7
6. Exploration, Environmental impact assessment and the 8
Environmental Regulations
7. Drafting challenges: specifics 9
8. Remoteness of Mining Activities 14
9. Managing Impacts of Deep Sea Resource Exploitation 14
project (MIDAS)
10. Standards, Protocols, Recommendations and Guidelines 14
11. Strategic environmental planning and management 16
12. Total Package 16
13. Review of this working document and working draft 17
Environmental Regulations
II Possible working structure for the 18
“Environmental Regulations”
III Tentative working draft of the “Environmental 23
Regulations”
Published January 2017 by:
International Seabed Authority
14-20 Port Royal Street
Kingston Jamaica
___________________________________________________________________
Disclaimer: the content of this Discussion Paper is neither endorsed by nor reflective of the opinions of
Member States of the International Seabed Authority nor any decision-making organs of the Authority.
© International Seabed Authority 2017
3

[Page 4]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Section I
Background to the development of the working draft Environmental
Regulations
1. Introduction
1.1 At its July 2016 meeting, the Legal and Technical Commission issued a first working
draft of the Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources
in the Area for consideration by the Members of the Authority and all stakeholders.1 The
Commission invited stakeholders to comment on that draft. Submissions have now been duly
received and are published on the Authority’s website.2
1.2 The Commission also proposed a revised work programme and action list, including
commencing a working draft of the “environmental regulations”,3 the subject matter of this
document.
1.3 The purpose of this discussion paper is to: -
 provide preliminary thoughts and background to the development of the
“Environmental Regulations”.
 provide comments relating to specific elements of these proposed regulations
and the challenges associated in their development alongside that of the
“Exploitation Regulations” (and Seabed Mining Directorate Regulations).
 populate, as far as possible, the suggested structure and content for the
Environmental Regulations as presented to the Legal and Technical Commission
in March 2016 and subsequently to participants at an environmental
management workshop in Australia in May 2016.4
2. Disclaimer
2.1 This document relating to the preliminary structure and wording for the
“Environmental Regulations” has been prepared in advance of any detailed review of
responses to the Authority’s working draft “Exploitation Regulations”. Consequently, this
document does not reflect any relevant suggestions flowing from those submissions nor any
potential inconsistencies highlighted between them. While every care has been taken to
harmonize the draft Exploitation Regulations (as they currently stand) and these draft
Environmental Regulations, some inconsistencies and ambiguities remain and require
resolution in due course.
2.2 Furthermore, the Authority has received a wealth of stakeholder input particularly in
relation to environmental matters over the last 2-3 years as part of its on-going stakeholder
engagement commitment. The working draft has clearly benefited from these submissions
and its drafting has attempted to factor in the widest range of views and opinions as
1 See Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area, March 2016. Available at
2 See https://www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Regs/DraftExpl/Comments/Comments.pdf.
3 See Annex II, Report of the Chair of the Legal and Technical Commission on the work of the
Commission at its session in 2016, ISBA/22/C/17, 13 July 2016.
4 See Co-Chair’s Report of the Griffith Law School and the International Seabed Authority Workshop on
Environmental Assessment and Management for Exploitation of Minerals in the Area Surfer’s Paradise,
23-26 May 2016. Available at https://www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Pubs/2016/GLS-ISA-Rep.pdf.
4

[Page 5]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
objectively and as reasonably as possible. Certain judgement calls have had to be made and
the draft demands a full and fair discussion in the interests of the common heritage and that
of sustainable development.
2.3 In the time available, not all components of the draft have been fully populated with
narrative or require a relevant technical expert to provide appropriate comment before any
drafting.
3. The Role of the Authority in regulatory development
3.1 In connection with the protection of the marine environment, the Authority is tasked
under LOSC Article 145 to adopt “appropriate rules, regulations and procedures” (RRPs) in
respect of necessary measures for the effective protection of the marine environment. Annex
III, Article 17 of the Convention specifically requires development (and subsequent uniform
application) of RRPs in connection with, inter alia, the protection of the marine environment
and in accordance with the objective criteria set out in Article 17(2)(g): -
“Rules, regulations and procedures shall be drawn up in order to secure effective
protection of the marine environment from harmful effects directly resulting from
activities in the Area or from shipboard processing immediately above a mine site of
minerals derived from that mine site, taking into account the extent to which such
harmful effects may directly result from drilling, dredging, coring and excavation and
from disposal, dumping and discharge into the marine environment of sediment,
wastes or other effluents”.
3.2 The 1994 Agreement also highlights the role of the Authority with regard to
environmental matters prior to the approval of the first exploitation contract,5 namely: -
 (g) Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures incorporating applicable
standards for the protection and preservation of the marine environment.
 (h) Promotion and encouragement of the conduct of marine scientific research
with respect to activities in the Area and the collection and dissemination of the
results of such research and analysis, when available, with particular emphasis
on research related to the environmental impact of activities in the Area.
 (i) Acquisition of scientific knowledge and monitoring of the development of
marine technology relevant to activities in the Area, in particular technology
relating to the protection and preservation of the marine environment.
 (k) Timely elaboration of rules, regulations and procedures for exploitation,
including those relating to the protection and preservation of the marine
environment.
3.3 To date, regulatory development has benefited from environmental and scientific
workshops, and from submissions to the Authority’s initial stakeholder survey in 2014 and
subsequent draft legal framework issued in 2015. In respect of the development of the
Environmental Regulations account will continue to be taken of the wealth of the stakeholder
content provided to date. The Authority intends to promote, encourage and support further
workshops and initiatives to further develop the overall “Mining Code”.
3.4 At its 21st Session, the Commission proposed a list of seven priority deliverables
which the Council duly endorsed at its 21st Session. These deliverables remain relevant to
5 Annex, Section 1 Para. 5.
5

[Page 6]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
the delivery of the regulatory framework and mechanism together with any recommendations
flowing from the Article 154 Review that are subsequently adopted by the Assembly.
Regulatory development will also benefit from the delivery of a Strategic Plan by the Authority
to direct and focus its work.
4. The Draft and Drafting approach
4.1 The aim of the working draft is to address the following issues: -
(a) the prevention, reduction and control of pollution and other hazards to the marine
environment, including the coastline, and of interference with the ecological balance of the
marine environment, particular attention being paid to the need for protection from harmful
effects of activities in the Area in accordance with best environmental practice, adaptive
management techniques and the precautionary approach.
(b) the protection and conservation of the natural resources of the Area and the prevention of
damage to the flora and fauna of the marine environment.
(c) to advance transparency in environmental decision-making by permitting appropriate
access to information held by the Authority concerning the impact of activities in the Area
on the marine environment and to facilitate and encourage public awareness and
participation by making such information widely available.6
(d) to ensure that necessary measures, including for coordination, cooperation and
harmonization, that are reasonable, practicable and safe, are adopted and implemented
for the effective protection of the marine environment.
(e) to ensure that environmental assessments are conducted in accordance with best practice
at both regional and project-impact levels.
(f) to apply a precautionary approach to the assessment and management of the risk of harm
to the marine environment and ensure that all aspects of the quality of the marine
environment affected by pollution and waste are considered in decisions relating to the
marine environment.
(g) to require persons engaged in activities in the Area to progressively make environmental
improvements (including reduction of pollution and waste at source) as such
improvements become practicable through technological and economic developments.
(h) to provide for monitoring and reporting on environmental quality on a regular basis to
ensure compliance with regulatory requirements and the maintenance of a record of
trends in environmental quality.
(i) to promote the disclosure of, and public access to, information about significant
environmental incidents and hazards.
(j) to promote the adoption of good standards and protocols to deliver effective regulation
and to secure the highest standards of marine environmental protection.
(k) to provide for meaningful Consultation during environmental assessment, planning and
the on-going environmental management of activities in the Area.
(l) to ensure that appropriate weight be given to both the long and short term economic,
environmental, social and equity considerations in deciding all matters relating to the
protection of the marine environment and, where technically feasible its restoration.
(m) to promote industry collaboration and involvement in the environmental protection process.
4.2 Given the levels of uncertainty (driven by a paucity of data and information and lack
of real industry experience), the formulation of the regulations is challenging. It is recognized
that this regulatory development process will generate further questions. But a start must be
made in prescribing key procedural requirements relating to environmental assessment and
management, both at the level of the Authority and at a project level. Drawing on parallel
6 See Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration.
6

[Page 7]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
examples and experience from land-based mining and oil and gas regimes, the shipping
industry and deep sea fishing activities is useful. The process also begins to provide clearer
expectations for potential investors. It also highlights the paramount need for a re-think in the
day-to-day operational functioning of the Authority.
4.3 The main purpose of the Environmental Regulations is to ensure that the approval
process for a Plan of Work for exploitation fully integrates environmental concerns into the
evaluation and decision-making process and that this integrated approach continues
throughout the life of a mining project.
4.4 The current working draft sets out a general set of environmental considerations and
obligations. That is, the draft is not resource-specific. Whether resource-specific regulations
will be required or whether resource-specific considerations can be dealt with through
annexes, relevant recommendations and guidelines can be addressed in due course.
4.5 In the drafting of these regulations, the approach taken is largely one of focusing on
procedural requirements (safeguards) on applicants (proponents of a Plan of Work),
contractors and the Authority. These procedural requirements will contribute to the delivery of
the RRPs required by Article 145 of the Convention.
4.6 References are made to Sponsoring States in the working draft but the lines of duty
and responsibility (jurisdictional competence) between the Authority and sponsoring States
(together with that of flag States, States Parties and non-Parties to the Convention and
relevant international organizations, including the International Maritime Organization) are not
entirely clear and will need to be “workshopped” in due course.
4.7 As knowledge advances, the working draft can provide for more prescriptive
obligations on the various actors as appropriate. At this stage, however, many requirements
are general in nature and the draft makes many references to “the Authority’s guidelines”. It
is intended that the regulations will be supported by technical guidance, guidelines and
recommendations to “operationalize” the regulations and retain flexibility until knowledge
gaps are filled. Being overly prescriptive at this stage will be counterproductive as regulations
will require a more formal amendment and adoption process compared with that of say
recommendations issued by the Commission or perhaps guidelines by the Secretariat.
4.8 Definitions will play a significant role in the Environmental Regulations and it is
necessary to develop internationally accepted definitions that are also compatible with Part XI
of the Convention. Schedule 1 to the working draft sets out a number of defined terms for
consideration. However, as highlighted below, defining certain terms, or at least setting out a
common understanding of those terms in an Area context, remains particularly challenging
5. Cost structure
5.1 It is hoped that the working draft reflects suggested best practice, both from the
stakeholder survey and approaches in national, regional and international regimes, applying
to good governance (regulatory administration and compliance) including transparency and
public participation mechanisms and commissioning opinions from experts. However, this will
add additional administrative (and likely material) costs to the existing structure, including
regulatory compliance costs for applicants / contractors. What the level of this cost will be is
unknown. But the overall cost structure has to be reasonable and transparent including the
allocation of those costs across the relevant actors.
7

[Page 8]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
6. Exploration, Environmental impact assessment 7 and the Environmental
Regulations
6.1 Environmental assessment is a fundamental focus of the working draft from a
procedural perspective. The PN Exploration Regulations provide for the following in
connection with environmental assessment:
Regulation 32 requires a contractor to “to gather environmental baseline data and to
establish environmental baselines…” and to assess the likely effects of its
exploration activities (which may include the testing of collecting systems and
equipment). A contractor is required to take account of the recommendations of the
Commission.8 The regulation also prescribes for the submission of data from
monitoring programmes on an annual basis.9
6.2 The data collected during exploration and establishing environmental baselines are
the primary inputs into an environmental assessment process leading toward the submission
of an environmental impact statement as a document needed for the approval of a plan of
work for exploitation. ISA Technical Study No. 10 (Environmental Management Needs for
Exploration and Exploitation of Deep Sea Minerals) contains a suggested template for the
content of an environmental (and social) impact statement and further work was undertaken
on this template at the Gold Coast workshop in May 2016.10
6.3 However, the definitive process(es) for environmental assessment (baseline delivery
to the production of an impact statement) have yet to be outlined by the Authority and the
extent and nature of the Authority’s involvement in the assessment process from cradle to
grave. Indeed, what is also unclear, is the role of Sponsoring States in the environmental
assessment process and subsequent monitoring / addressing non-compliance.11
6.4 The title of the suggested draft Environmental Regulations under Section III to this
paper includes “exploration”. Perhaps these regulations provide an opportunity to deal
comprehensively with all environment-related issues in the Area? It is not the intention to “re-
write” the environmental obligations or deliverables under the Exploration Regulations but it
needs to be acknowledged that the latter are relatively basic in their approach, albeit
supported by recommendations of the Commission.
6.5 Consequently, the development of the Environmental Regulations provides the
opportunity to look critically at the obligations and deliverables under the Exploration
Regulations and related processes which potentially feed into the exploitation application
process and ongoing management and monitoring programmes and to clarify or populate
further detail. That is, what exactly is / are the specific (not generic) deliverables at the end of
7 Under the regulations a combined Environmental and social impact assessment will be required.
8 See Recommendations for the guidance of contractors for the assessment of the possible
environmental impacts arising from exploration for polymetallic nodules in the Area ISBA/16/LTC/7.
9 See also Recommendations for the guidance of contractors on the content, format and structure of
annual reports ISBA/21/LTC/15.
10 One of the principle agenda items and priority outputs of the March 2017 environmental management
workshop in Berlin is a final review of this template and the issue of a final draft version.
11 Also, as highlighted in ISA Discussion Paper No 4., Enforcement and Liability Challenges in the
Regulation of Deep Seabed Mining at page 10: “Even where adherence to international rules is
demonstrated, there would remain potential for inconsistent interpretation and application of those rules
that may need to be resolved. As a consequence, there will be a need for both vertical (Authority –
sponsoring state) and horizontal (between sponsoring states) harmonization of EIA processes and
related compliance action to avoid conflicting directions and duplication”.
8

[Page 9]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
the exploration phase? What, for example, constitutes an “adequate” or “good” baseline
(criteria?) which feeds into the next stage of an environmental assessment process? (Note:
the current working draft attempts to define the components of an EIA process, including an
adequate baseline study but further guidelines will be needed).
7. Drafting challenges: specifics
7.1 The working draft presents a number of challenges for consideration, not least in
relation to terminology and language. Appropriate commentary has also been added to a
number of draft regulations.
“Impact”, “Effect” and “Change”
7.2 The working draft defines both “Environmental Impacts” and “Environmental Effects”.
However, what is the difference? Or can these terms be used interchangeably in a DSM
context? The Convention makes no reference to the word “impact” but to “effects” (e.g.
Article 145 speaks to “harmful effects”). The SDC Advisory Opinion makes numerous
references to “impacts” and refers only to “effects” in repeating the language of the
Convention. The PN Regulations uses both words and what appears to be interchangeably.12
The US NEPA Regulations treats the two words as synonymous.13 It is generally understood
that “impacts” are any changes resulting from activities or action; whereas, “effects” are the
consequences of “impacts”.14 Is the distinction one of timing? That is, “impacts” are assessed
during an EIA process, whereas “effects” are monitored and managed as mining activities
progress? That said, there is merit in sticking with the language of the Convention wherever
possible.
7.3 In defining serious harm, the Authority uses the concept of significant adverse
change. Again, is there any intended difference or consequence between “change”, “impact”
or “effect”? While many contemporary environmental instruments use similar language,
perhaps interchangeably,15 the Convention uses the words “change” and “effect” in such a
way that they are different concepts. In an environmental context, Article 196(1) makes
reference to “significant and harmful changes”; furthermore, Article 206 refers to planned
activities that may cause, inter alia, “significant and harmful changes to the marine
environment” combined with a requirement to “assess the potential effects of such activities
on the marine environment”. Article 206 makes a clear and fundamental distinction. It is
possible legally to have an “effect” without having a “change”.
7.4 The language in the working draft may need to modified to take account of these
observations in due course to ensure both a consistent approach and terminology that
accords with the language and intent of the Convention.
12 E.g. regulation 32: “…against which to assess the likely effects of its programme of activities under
the plan of work for exploration…”.
13 §1508.8 Effects.
14 Equally, national legislation generally refers to the need for environmental assessment where a
project is likely to have significant effects on the environment. In the context of the PN Exploration
Regulations, serious harm encompasses significant adverse change. In the Pulp Mills on the River
Uruguay case, reference is made to significant adverse impact (Para.204).
15 This point was also highlighted at the Gold Coast workshop in May 2016 and a need to consider and
align the different terminology to fill any gaps of the type of harm anticipated under UNCLOS.
9

[Page 10]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Serious harm / significant adverse change
7.5 There is no doubt that a common understanding of what constitutes or how to define
“serious harm” for the purposes of the Part XI regime continues to elude the broad
stakeholder base.16
7.6 In 1990, the Preparatory Commission for the ISA considered the following definition
for “serious harm”: -
"serious harm to the marine environment" means any effect from activities in the
Area on the living or non-living components of the marine environment and
associated ecosystems beyond that which is negligible or which has been assessed
and judged to be acceptable by the Authority pursuant to these regulations and the
relevant rules and regulations adopted by the Authority and which represent:
(a) significant adverse changes in the living and non-living components of
the marine and atmospheric environment;
(b) significant adverse changes in the ecosystem diversity, productivity and
stability of the biological communities within the environment; or
(c) loss of scientific or economic values which is unreasonable in relation to
the benefit derived from the activity in question.”17
There is merit in considering the definition above for the purposes of the working
draft. However, at the time of writing the source and basis for this working definition is not
known and this would aid further discussion.
7.7 The Exploration Regulations (and the working draft Environmental Regulations) also
speak to the concept of “significant adverse change”. As is the case with many of these
definitions in national and international law, further qualifiers / legal thresholds (“negligible”,
“significant”, “acceptable” etc.) present further challenges. There is no one single component
that will define serious harm (or significant adverse change); that is, a number of factors /
criteria will need to be considered.18 Equally, science speaks to ecological thresholds and
their respective tipping points.
7.8 It is not intended in this discussion paper to explore this matter in further detail but to
recommend that a working group is established to advance discussions and perhaps re-think
the way in which this is being approached. In advance of any working group, a technical
paper should be commissioned which considers comprehensively national and international
approaches to this.
16 See also discussion of serious harm at Gold Coast workshop.
17 Article 2(2) Draft Regulations on Prospecting, Exploration and Exploitation of Polymetallic Nodules in
the Area, Addendum, Part VIII, Protection and Preservation of the Marine Environment from Activities in
the Area, Working Paper by the Secretariat, LOS/PCN/SCN.3/WP.6/Add.5, 8 February 1990. (In 1991,
a redraft by the Chairman of Special Commission 3 used the concept of “unacceptable changes” to the
marine environment meaning changes to the marine environment which will result or are resulting from
activities in the Area and which are judged unacceptable according to the environmental standards
recommended by the Legal and Technical Commission and adopted by the Council (see
LOS/PCN/SCN.3/WP.6/Add.5/Rev.1)).
18 For example, the FAO International Guidelines in connection with deep sea bottom trawling which
may provide a starting point as modified or expanded upon for DSM activities.
10

[Page 11]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Addressing serious harm to the marine environment in the regulations for the
exploitation of mineral resources in the Area (ISBA/21/C/13, 8 June 2015)
7.9 The Kingdom of the Netherlands, through the above paper, invited the Council to
request the Commission to consider the following in the development of the exploitation code:
(a) The exploitation regulations be based on the provisions on emergency orders in
the exploration regulations in order to address threats of serious harm to the marine
environment following an incident resulting from or caused by a contractor’s activities
in the Area;
(b) The exploitation regulations include an obligation requiring contractors to address
serious harm to the marine environment by:
(i) Assessing the technical and economic feasibility of implementing
restoration measures and;
(ii) Providing for restoration by equivalent, compensatory measures and/or
the payment of monetary compensation if no adequate restoration measures
have been or can be implemented;
(c) Private sector initiatives to address harm to the marine environment be
supported and encouraged.
7.10 The issues raised by this paper are of significance. As highlighted at paragraph 9 of
ISBA/21/C/13, under a number of instruments response measures do not apply to all
environmental loss: “The loss must result in an adverse effect on the environment that is
measurable or otherwise observable and surpasses a certain threshold. The threshold is
usually defined using qualitative terms such as “significant” or “serious””.
7.11 Paragraph 10 also highlights that “response measures may not always be technically
feasible or economically reasonable”. Currently this is the case as regards restoration
measures, though further research and studies are warranted.19
7.12 The working draft does consider a number of the points raised above, including that
of emergency orders (though the practical application of this as drafted under the Exploration
Regulations is questionable), compensatory measures (through funds (and perhaps offsets)
and consideration of restorative measures in an environmental management and monitoring
plan / closure plan.20 However, these aspects remain for further discussion by stakeholders
as the Authority develops a “total regulatory package”.21
“Operators”
7.13 UNCLOS refers in Annex III to “operator”.22 In an oil and gas context, operators may
be the licensee or one of the licensees under a production license or a third party appointed
by a licensee. The management of risk is inherent in conducting activities in the Area and it is
an operator undertaking day-to-day operations who has the primary responsibility for that
19 See van Dover et al Ecological restoration in the deep sea: Desiderata Marine Policy 44 (2014) 98–
106.
20 The original draft legal framework issued in July 2015 proposed a restorative / rehabilitative obligation
on contractors where required by the Council and based on technical and economic feasibility. The
general consensus among stakeholders at the time was restoration was not considered technically
feasible, no obligation to restore should be reflected but that such measures be considered in the plan
of work.
21 Aspects relating to “compensatory measures” will be considered by a legal working group on
responsibility and liability in the Area and also as part of the overall payment regime discussions.
22 E.g Article 14, Annex III states “the operator shall transfer to the Authority…”. The word is also used
in Articles 5, 10, 16, 17
11

[Page 12]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
management (operational, health and safety, environmental).23 The Exploitation Regulations
are targeted at a Contractor (the sponsored entity) level with “simple” reporting / disclosure
obligations as regards the use of sub-contractors. Was the intention of adopting “operator” to
adopt RRPs that apply directly to third party operators? Should the regulations consider this
further? Or was the drafting of “operator” simply to reflect / include activities by the Enterprise?
Sponsoring Sates and matters of jurisdiction and competence
7.14 There needs to be a clear understanding of the role of the sponsoring State in the
overall regulatory (including the application for sponsorship) and enforcement process as part
of its responsibility to ensure. Will an agreement or arrangement between a sponsoring State
and a sponsored contractor likely contain / impose any specific terms and conditions on a
sponsored contractor?24 This issue of jurisdiction and competence also extend to flag States
and matters relating to marine pollution (e.g., as governed by IMO for vessel-based pollution)
and dumping. All aspects of the exploitation operations will need to be considered and areas
of jurisdiction mapped out.25
Environmental Objectives
7.15 Article 145 of the Convention requires “necessary measures” to be taken to “ensure
effective protection for the marine environment” and for the Authority to adopt RRPs to this
end. Article 145(a) specifically refers to “interference with the ecological balance of the
marine environment”, with Article 145(b) requiring the protection and conservation of the
natural resources and prevention of damage to the flora and fauna.
7.16 Article 145 clearly stipulates the policy objectives with regard to the protection of the
marine environment and the obligation to take necessary measures through the adoption of
RRPs.
7.17 However, “effective protection” needs to be operationalized in the context of Article
145. Ideally, the Authority (and its stakeholders) need to establish ecological objectives and
environmental goals and relevant targets and measurable environmental indicators for the
status of the mined and adjacent areas. That is, in order to develop an outcome-based
approach (both qualitative and quantitative elements (“Environmental Targets”)) toward
designing necessary measures to protect the different components of the marine
environment, such an articulation of objectives is required.26 Furthermore, these will be
23 Under Directive 2013/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on
safety of offshore oil and gas operations and amending Directive 2004/35/EC, firmly places
responsibility at an “operator” level.
24 Though see for example Section 94 Tuvalu Seabed Minerals Act 2014: not impose unnecessary,
disproportionate, or duplicate regulatory burden on Sponsored Parties, nor impose requirements upon a
Sponsored Party under this Act or Regulations to be made under this Act except insofar as these are
consistent with existing requirements imposed by, the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, the Rules
of the ISA and other applicable standards of international law.”
25 See Commission’s High Level Issue No. 2 and a need for a workshop on jurisdictional competencies.
26 The EU Marine Strategy Framework focuses on the achieving or maintaining “good environmental
status” of marine waters through a number of qualitative descriptors. The directive also applies the
adaptive management approach to achieving such status. Good environmental status is defined as (a)
the structure, functions and processes of the constituent marine ecosystems, together with the
associated physio- graphic, geographic, geological and climatic factors, allow those ecosystems to
function fully and to maintain their resilience to human-induced environmental change. Marine species
and habitats are protected, human-induced decline of biodiversity is prevented and diverse biological
components function in balance; (b) hydro-morphological, physical and chemical properties of the
ecosystems, including those properties which result from human activities in the area concerned,
12

[Page 13]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
fundamental in assessing the satisfactory “Environmental Performance” of a contractor under
an exploitation contract.
Application of the Precautionary Approach
7.18 Discussion still remains around both definitional and operational aspects of the
precautionary approach in a DSM context. Academic literature has for over two decades
discussed the application of the precautionary approach and the threshold at which its
application is triggered. For DSM activities, the fundamental question to be addressed now is
not should the precautionary approach be applied, but how? How is the precautionary
approach to be applied to activities in the Area by an applicant, contractor, ISA and
sponsoring States?
7.19 The working draft sets out the approach as one of the guiding values. It also requires
in certain cases for applicants and the Authority to demonstrate where precaution has been
applied, the rationale for its application and the precautionary measures to be adopted.
Further thought and guidance is needed to ensure that the approach is embedded in a risk
assessment and management framework. There are many parallels and much experience in
applying the approach in other regimes.27
7.20 Adaptive management (as a tool for the application of precaution28) is discussed
briefly within the relevant section of the working draft but as yet, no suggested regulatory
wording. Adaptive management and its appropriateness / criteria for DSM activities, require a
dedicated working group.
“The Authority”
7.21 Currently numerous references to “the Authority” exist in the working draft regulations
and the Exploitation regulations. In due course, the specific organ or functioning unit of the
Secretariat will need to be identified as the object of the obligation or duty.
Time limits
7.22 Time limits in the evaluation of and decision making in connection with the approval
of a Plan of Work need to be set. Benchmark time-scales are found in terrestrial mining
codes. A responsive and clear time-bound decision-making process is needed. The working
draft attempts to define certain key time limits in the regulatory process. However, these need
to be reviewed and considered in the light of the overall approval process for a Plan of Work,
the complexities involved (which may be resource- / location-specific as well) and the
interests of a fair and proper process and procedure.
7.23 Equally important is the issue of the operational practices of the various organs of
the Authority and the timing of meetings of the Council and the Commission in particular. The
support the ecosystems as described above. Anthropogenic inputs of substances and energy, including
noise, into the marine environment do not cause pollution effects.
27 See also Aline Jaeckel, The International Seabed Authority and Marine Environmental Protection: A
Case Study in Implementing the Precautionary Principle (PhD thesis, University of New South Wales,
Australia, 2015). An extract /discussion paper based on this thesis was presented by Jaeckel at the
Gold Coast workshop in May 2016 and centres on three dimensions involved in the implementation of
the precautionary approach, namely the taking of protective measures as well as the procedural and
institutional dimensions. Several elements within these dimensions have been addressed in the working
draft including the significance of transparency and public participation in the evaluation process.
28 Adaptive management may also be considered as part of Best Environment Practice and overall
good management within any organization.
13

[Page 14]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
regulations cannot be practically structured / drafted around the current meeting schedules of
these organs. The latter will have to be adjusted accordingly. The content of the regulations
must drive the form and functioning of the Authority. This includes the resourcing needs for
the Secretariat, e.g., the need to establish an “Environmental division / EIA Unit” in the
Secretariat function to help guide (scope) the EIA process such that as detailed and as
comprehensive an EIS is produced for consideration and evaluation by the Commission.29
8. Remoteness of Mining Activities
8.1 The development and implementation of a fit-for-purpose regulatory and enforcement
framework needs to consider the remoteness of mining operations. A classical command and
control structure may not be an entirely appropriate mechanism for the Area. The regime
needs to develop clear and unambiguous contractual obligations, encompassing relevant
standards and protocols (see 10. below) duly enforced by an inspection / observer scheme
(including remote visual / sensors) and co-operation between the Authority and Sponsoring
States. This points to the need for an effective mining, compliance and enforcement
mechanism.
9. Managing Impacts of Deep Sea Resource Exploitation project (MIDAS)
9.1 The working draft has been prepared as certain deliverables flowing from the MIDAS
project were being released. It has not been possible within the timeframe to assimilate the
full outputs of this project. Aspects of the various work packages have been used, where
appropriate, to validate approaches taken in the drafting of these regulations. Nevertheless, a
wealth of considerations flowing from the MIDAS project remains for discussion.
9.2 Readers of this paper are encouraged to read as a minimum, MIDAS Deliverable 9.6
(Work Package 9) Report on the implications of MIDAS results for policy makers with
recommendations for future regulations to be adopted by the EU and the ISA30 which
provides an overview of the key regulatory recommendations. As highlighted above, a key
challenge will be the balance between adequately prescriptive regulations and their
supporting recommendations and guidelines.
10. Standards, Protocols, Recommendations and Guidelines
10.1 Standards are a way of determining acceptable management. Two elements are
essential to effective standards – content and credibility. Content must be relevant to needs
and be practical and feasible (cost-effective) and based on best information and data
available. Equally, and of particular relevance to DSM, flexible to improvement in knowledge
and experience. Credibility requires a buy-in from stakeholders through consensus building.
10.2 Standards and protocols are useful in standardising processes and procedures and
in achieving consistency across the contractor base. Standards (and standardization) are
useful in setting the definition and benchmark for the expected levels of operational safety
required for an effective regulatory regime as regards human health and safety and the
protection of the marine environment. “Good” standards facilitate a common approach within
29 These issues are highlighted by and form the basis of a number of recommendations in the Article
154 Review report.
30 16 December 2016. Available at https://www.eu-
midas.net/sites/default/files/deliverables/D9.6_FINAL_lowres.pdf (accessed 25.01.2017).
14

[Page 15]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
an industry, assist in establishing the all-important level playing field and, certainly in the case
of the oil and gas sector, lead to other efficiencies, such as in economies of scale.
10.3 Certain ISO (and other national, regional and international) standards may be of
direct relevance and applicability to DSM activities. Benefits of such standards include their
development through a consensus-based approach with the involvement of industry and that
they are potentially auditable. The extent to which specific standards (such as
ISO14001:201531 and ISO 3100032 etc.) are appropriate for direct application within a DSM
context or with appropriate modification requires detailed examination. Some international
standards apply at an organization/entity level and their practical and effective application at
an operating level also requires examination. There will be a need to consider, where
applicable, the development (and implementation) of DSM-specific standards, and a
participatory / consensus-based approach in their development.33 However, the first
overarching question is: what is needed and what type of “standards” are available, need
adaption and / or need formulating and for what?34
10.4 The working draft itself is also prescribing standards and protocols together with
anticipated recommendations and Authority guidelines. However, the exact nature, status
(legal) and what they are trying to achieve (in the context of Good Industry Practice) must be
discussed. Is the intention for such standards to provide direction but also control over
activities in the Area in providing possible measurable outcomes or target deliverables? Or, in
the case of a “guidance document” (referred to on many occasions in the working draft),
simply to provide clear(er) guidance on technical or administrative matters (e.g., the form of
application documents); that is, to recommend ways of doing things.
10.5 For example, the EIA process. The outcome which will be prescribed for is the
content of an environmental impact statement. However, guidelines can be prepared setting
out recommended ways of conducting, say environmental risk assessment and generally
accepted risk assessment methodologies, but the application of those risk assessment
methodologies lies with the applicant.35
10.6 Over-prescription can both stifle innovation and not reflect individual contractor
operations. Where appropriate, specific contractual terms and conditions should be adopted
to provide for appropriate contractor / site-specific measures.
31 ISO 14000:2015, Environmental management.
32 ISO 31000:2009, Risk management – Principles and guidelines.
33 See, for example, Mining, Minerals and Sustainable Development, Participation and Governance
Structures, October 2001.
34 It is anticipated that the Berlin Workshop in March 2017 will look at this.
35 The Environmental Impact Assessment (Part IV Divisions 1 and 2) Administrative Procedures 2012
(at Clause 16 and in connection with “Recommended Conditions”) of Western Australia very usefully
summarizes the point being made here: “The EPA’s preference is to recommend outcome-based
conditions. That is, conditions which focus on the ultimate objective that is to be achieved (in
contrast to prescriptive conditions, with detailed requirements about “how” to achieve the
objective). The aim of the outcome-based approach to condition-setting is to regulate “what” to
achieve, not “how” to achieve it.”
15

[Page 16]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
11. Strategic environmental planning and management
11.1 The tentative working draft as presented in Section III to this discussion paper is
designed principally to regulate for the requirements on and conduct of applicants and
contractors.
11.2 The revised draft legal framework for the Mining Code issued by the Commission in
July 2015 anticipated the adoption of Strategic Environmental Impact Assessments and
Strategic Environmental Management Plans (SEMPs) by the Authority. However, at a
subsequent environmental management workshop in May 2016, a wealth of terminology and
different layers of assessment and plans were introduced (SEAs, SEMPs, Regional
Environmental Assessments and Regional Environmental Management Plans). The
workshop neither provided for clear definitions nor a clear articulation of the need for the
different levels of assessment and plans and how they would relate to one another.
Consequently, there appears to be confusion across the stakeholder base as to needs,
requirements and terminology and as to whether a set of regulations designed to define the
legal relationship between contractors and the Authority is the appropriate instrument for the
purpose of setting forth matters of policy.
11.3 That said, there does appear to be broad consensus, as a matter of policy, on the
need for one “overarching strategic document” which would provide a context for the
development of regional plans at an appropriate geographical and temporal scale (SEMPs).
The precise content of these remains unclear.
11.4 An overarching document could, for example, present the environmental objectives
for the Area to operationalize the policy goal of Article 145 of the Convention. It could also
demonstrate how activities in the Area contribute to the common heritage of mankind and
sustainable development (including the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals e.g. SDG 14),
generally accepted biodiversity targets and provide an insight into the trade-offs between the
3 pillars of sustainable development.
11.5 As to SEMPs, work has already been undertaken in respect of an environmental
management plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone36 (and the designation of APEIs) together
with scientific workshops in connection with the development of a plan for the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge. The environmental management workshop to be held in Berlin in March 2017 will
potentially explore the content of SEMPs, using the CCZ EMP as the base document for
critical assessment. SEMPs will inform the development of environmental assessment and
corresponding site-specific environmental management and monitoring plans.
11.6 Aa highlighted above, a clearer and inclusive process and procedure needs to be
established with regard to the content, purpose, development and implementation of relevant
strategic plans and documents.
12. Total package
12.1 As highlighted by the Commission in its covering note to the working draft
Exploitation Regulations, whereas there is a “building block” approach to regulatory
development, it is understood that “nothing is agreed until everything is agreed”.
36 See Review of the implementation of the environmental management plan for the Clarion-Clipperton
Fracture Zone, ISBA/22/LTC/12, 17 June 2016 regarding the status of the CCZ EMP and proposed
actions.
16

[Page 17]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
12.2 In addition to the further development of the Exploitation Regulations (and Seabed
Mining Directorate Regulations), other action areas (including priority deliverables) will affect
the development of the Environmental Regulations, including a legal working group on
responsibility and liability in the Area, further development of the payment regime in the Area
(including environmental incentives) and subsequent workshops on environmental
management in the Area.37
12.3 Additionally, in February / March 2017, the Commission aims to formulate a clearer
working methodology with regard to the development of the overall Mining Code. To this end,
in July 2016, as part of stakeholder submissions to the working draft Exploitation Regulations,
the Commission sought the views of stakeholders as to the best mechanism for regulatory
development to ensure a transparent and inclusive approach.
13. Review of this working document and working draft Environmental
Regulations
13.1 It would be helpful to the Authority, in due course, for any reader / reviewer of this
discussion paper and tentative working draft, that the following questions be considered: -
i. does the working draft follow a logical flow to the development of environmental
assessment and management in the Area?
ii. aside from specific drafting style and language (draft regulations will be presented to
expert legislative draftsmen in due course), are the draft regulations clear and
concise as to their intended need and requirement?
iii. do any draft regulations appear superfluous or adding little value?
iv. are the draft regulations within the legal parameters and authority of the Convention
and the Agreement?
v. is the structure and content of the working draft adequate / fit-for-purpose?
vi. does the working draft (albeit incomplete in parts) achieve a “good” balance between
being necessarily prescriptive but not overly prescriptive? That is, what level or detail
of prescription is required at this stage?
vii. from a technical viewpoint, are the obligations realistic and achievable?
viii. from an economic / financial perspective, what are the implications for applicants /
contractors and the regulatory structure?
ix. whereas a detailed discussion over definitional content will be needed, at this stage
of drafting, what other definitions could be relevant? Or are there too many
definitions?
x. is it sufficiently clear that the appropriate onus / burden of proof under these
regulations in terms of risk assessment and management remains with the applicant
as the proponent of exploitation activities?
37 Towards an ISA Environmental Management Strategy for the Area, Berlin, March 2017.
17

[Page 18]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Section II
Possible working structure for the “Environmental
Regulations”
Title
Preamble
Part I – Introduction
1. Use of terms and scope
Part II – General matters
Section 1: General
2. The Authority’s environmental duties and objectives for the Area
3. Applicant for the purpose of these Regulations
Section 2: Guiding principles
4. General
5. Best Available Scientific Evidence
6. Ecosystem-based approach
7. Precautionary Approach
8. Best Environmental Practices
9. Promotion of access to Environmental Information
10. Consultation in Environmental assessment, Evaluation and management
11. Co-operation
12. Environmental Objectives: protection and conservation of the natural resources
13. Waste minimization
Section 3: Restrictions and prohibitions
14. Restriction on Mining Discharges
15. [Emergency Dumping]
16. Exclusion areas
Part III – Environmental Assessment
Section 1: General
17. Environmental assessment
Section 2: Environmental Baseline
18. Identification (delineation) of Environmental Impact Area
19. Environmental Baseline study
Section 3: Environmental scoping report
20. Environmental scoping report: preparation, review and opinion
18

[Page 19]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Section 4: Environmental Risk Assessment and Evaluation
21. Risk assessment and evaluation of likely Environmental Impacts
Section 5: Alternatives, Mitigation and management measures
22. Alternatives, Mitigation and management measures
[Section 6: Matters to be taken into account in determining whether an activity
(or component thereof) is likely to have a significant Environmental Impact]
Part IV – Preparation of Environmental Plans
Section 1: General
23. Applicant to comply with relevant guidelines and Regulations
24. Authority’s right to request separate Environmental Plans by Mining Area
25. Notice in respect of application for approval of Plan of Work
Section 2: Environmental Impact Statement
26. Preparation of Environmental Impact Statement
27. Information requirements for the Environmental Impact Statement
Section 3: Environmental Management System
28. Requirements for Environmental Management System
Section 4: Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
29. Preparation of Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
30. Information requirements for the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
Section 5: Closure Plan
31. Purpose of Closure Plan
32. Information requirements for the Closure Plan
[Section 6: Emergency Response and Contingency Plan]
Part V – Preliminary review of the Environmental Plans by the Authority
33. Review of Application for Approval of a Plan of Work: Preliminary review by the Authority
Part VI – Publicity and Consultation
34. General
35. Public notification of application for approval of a Plan of Work and access to
Environmental Plans
36. Review of the Environmental Plans by Interested Persons
37. Applicant’s response to submissions by Interested Persons
38. Authority’s review and report on submissions
Part VII – Consideration of the Environmental Plans by the Legal and
Technical Commission
19

[Page 20]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Section 1: General
39. General
Section 2: Process and procedure for recommendations relating to the
evaluation of the Environmental Plans by the Commission
40. Facilitating involvement of Interested Persons in Environmental Evaluation
41. Matters to be taken into account by the Commission
Section 3: Amendments, modifications (Conditions) attaching to the Plan of
Work in respect of Environmental Matters
42. Amendments and modifications of the Environmental Plans
Section 4: Delivery of a revised Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan and revised Closure Plan
43. Procedure for the delivery of the revised Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan and revised Closure Plan
Section 5: Environmental Performance Guarantee (“environmental bond”)
44. Provision for a Financial Guarantee or Security
Section 6: Commission’s recommendations to Council on its evaluation of the
Environmental Plans and conditions
45. Factors to be considered by the Commission
46. Commission may obtain further advice
47. Evaluation Report to the Council
Part VIII – Modification and Periodic Review of the Environmental Plans
[EMMP / Closure Plan]
48. Modification of the Environmental Plans
49. Substantive review of Environmental Performance
Part IX – Environmental Management and Monitoring
Section 1: Adaptive management approach
Section 2: Protection of the Marine Environment from Harmful Activities -
Obligations on the Contractor
50. General
51. Adherence to Contract – Compliance with Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan and Closure Plan
52. Environmental Monitoring
53. Performance Assessment
54. Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems
55. Environmental Auditing
20

[Page 21]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
56. Pollution Control and Management of Waste
57. Vessel (installation) and equipment positioning
Section 3: Environmental Incidents: contingency plans and emergencies
58. Duty on Contractor to keep an Environmental Incidents Register
59. Risk of Incidents
60. Emergency Response and Contingency Plans
Section 4: Other
61. Unforeseen significant adverse change
62. Complaints
63. Training
64. Notifiable Events under an Exploitation Contract
Part X – Social and cultural Management
Part XI - Closure plans and post-closure monitoring
65. Suspension of / cessation of activities / care and maintenance (temporary suspension)
66. Post-closure Monitoring and management
Part XII – Compensatory measures
Section 1: Environmental Liability Trust Fund
67. Set-up of Environmental Liability Trust Fund
68. Purpose of the fund
69. Funding
Section 2: Other compensatory measures
70. Residual [significant] adverse change
Part XIII - Data and information management
Section 1: Obligations on Authority
Section 2: Obligations on Contractor
Part XIV - Compliance, Supervision, Enforcement [and Penalties]
Section 1: General
71. General
72. Power of Authority to direct Contractor to take action to prevent or minimize
Environmental Impacts
73. Necessary measures to secure compliance
21

[Page 22]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Section 2: Emergency Orders
74. Emergency Orders
Section 3: Area Environmental Protection Measure
75. Area Environmental Protection Measure
Section 4: Compliance (remediation?) Notice
Section 5: Power to take remedial action
76. Authority’s power to recover costs in the event of remedial measures
Section 6: Penalties
Part XV – Annual reporting obligations
77. Annual Reporting by Contractors
Part XVI – Other administrative matters
78. Avoidance of duplication in procedures
79. Information discovery order
80. Public register
81. Review and amendment of these Regulations
Annexes to the Environmental Regulations
Annex I Environmental scoping report
Annex II Format / Content of an Environmental Impact Statement
Annex III Format / Content of an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
Annex IV Format / Content of a Closure Plan
Annex V Content of an Emergency Response and Contingency Plan
Annex VI Standard Contract Terms: Environmental management, monitoring and
reporting: standard terms for inclusion in Exploitation Contract.
22

[Page 23]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Section III
Tentative Working draft of the “Environmental Regulations”
Title
Regulations on [Exploration and] Exploitation for Mineral Resources in the Area
(Environmental Matters).
Preamble
In accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 (“the Convention”), the seabed and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction, as well as its resources, are the common heritage of mankind,
the Exploration and Exploitation of which shall be carried out for the benefit of mankind as a
whole, on whose behalf the International Seabed Authority acts. The objective of this set of
Regulations is to provide for the effective protection for the Marine Environment from the
harmful effects of Exploitation Activities in the Area, particularly, to: -
(a) promote guiding principles to the development, management and regulation of
activities in the Area as they impact the Marine Environment.
(b) set-out a process and procedure for the conduct of environmental assessment in
the Area by the Authority and by Applicants for the approval of a Plan of Work.
(c) ensure that environmental matters are integrated into and evaluated as part of
the decision-making process in assessing an application for the approval of a
Plan of Work.
(d) provide for the preparation, relevant processes and evaluation of certain
environmental documents submitted as part of the application for the approval of
a Plan of Work under regulation 4 of the Exploitation Regulations.
(e) provide for the subsequent review and modification of Environmental Plans.
(f) provide for the environmental monitoring and management of activities in the
Area.
(g) provide for appropriate compensatory measures, where applicable; and
(h) ensure that appropriate, procedurally fair Consultation is promoted and
implemented.
Part I – Introduction
Draft Regulation 1
Use of terms and scope
1. Terms used in the Convention shall have the same meaning in these Regulations. Where
applicable, terms used in the Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation
for Mineral Resources in the Area shall have the same meaning in these Regulations.
2. In accordance with the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (“the Agreement”), the
provisions of the Agreement and Part XI of the Convention shall be interpreted and
applied together as a single instrument. These Regulations and references in these
Regulations to the Convention are to be interpreted and applied accordingly.
3. For the purposes of these Regulations:
23

[Page 24]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
[“Definitions”: a list of defined terms (indicative at this stage) can be found at
Schedule 1 to this working draft. Definitions will advance as both the regulatory
content evolves and / or a common approach toward terms based on internationally
accepted definitions is established. The content of the draft should drive the
formulation of definitions].
4. These Regulations are subject to the provisions of the Convention and the Agreement
and other rules of international law not incompatible with the Convention.
24

[Page 25]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part II - General matters
Section 1: General
Draft Regulation 2
The Authority’s environmental duties and objectives for the Area
1. The Authority shall, in accordance with the Convention and the Agreement, establish and
keep under periodic review environmental rules, regulations and procedures, including its
guidelines and recommendations, to ensure effective protection for the marine
environment from harmful effects which may arise from activities in the Area.
2. Additionally, the Authority will undertake the necessary strategic assessment and
management planning in accordance with its policy and in conjunction with Interested
Persons and to develop Environmental Objectives for the effective protection of the
Marine Environment in accordance with Article 145 of the Convention.
3. [Other?].
Draft Regulation 3
Applicant for the purpose of these Regulations
For the purpose of these Regulations an Applicant includes:
(a) any entity under regulation 2 of the Exploitation Regulations applying for the approval
of a Plan of Work; or
(b) any entity holding an Exploitation Contract and where such entity proposes to
conduct Exploitation Activities in a part of the Contract Area, being a proposed
Mining Area, not previously subject to assessment and evaluation under these
Regulations.
Section 2: Guiding principles
Draft Regulation 4
General
1. The object of these regulations is the effective protection of the Marine Environment from
the harmful effect of activities in the Area having regard to the principles set out in this
Section 2.
2. All persons engaged in or connected with activities in the Area, in connection with the
assessment, management, administration and regulation of those activities, as the case
may be, shall consider the guiding principles in this Section 2 according to the Authority’s
guidelines on the basis of Internationally Recognized Standards and practices.
Draft Regulation 5
Best Available Scientific Evidence
All risk assessment and risk management undertaken in connection with environmental
assessment and the proper management and response measures taken under or in
accordance with these Regulations, shall be based on Best Available Scientific Evidence.
Draft Regulation 6
Ecosystem-based approach
1. The ecosystem approach shall be considered with respect to the management of
activities in the Area that have an Environmental Impact on the Marine Environment.
25

[Page 26]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
2. The ecosystem approach will be based on Best Available Scientific Evidence about the
marine ecosystem and its dynamics in order to identify, manage and take necessary
measures to minimize a risk of interference with the ecological balance of the Marine
Environment, taking account of appropriate spatial and temporal scales.
Draft Regulation 7
Precautionary approach
All persons engaged in activities in the Area shall apply the Precautionary Approach, as
reflected in Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration, to the assessment and management of risk of
harm to the Marine Environment from Exploitation Activities in the Area and where scientific
evidence concerning the scope and potential negative impact of the activity in question is
insufficient but where there are plausible indications of potential risks of Serious Harm to the
Marine Environment.
Draft Regulation 8
Best Environmental Practices
1. The best combination of environmental management and response measures shall be
adopted in accordance with Good Industry Practice [and incorporating Best Available
Techniques].
2. The development and application of environmental standards and protocols shall be
continually reviewed in order that progressive improvements are made in the efficient and
effective protection of the Marine Environment, including the reduction of Pollution and
waste at source, as such improvements become relevant and practicable through
technological development and advances in scientific knowledge, and are economically
feasible.
3. Where the application of Best Environmental Practice does not deliver acceptable results,
additional or alternative measures may be required and Best Environmental Practice
redefined accordingly.
Draft Regulation 9
Promotion of access to Environmental Information
1. The Authority and Sponsoring States shall promote and develop procedures to ensure
the practicable and timely provision of relevant Environmental Information to Interested
Persons.
2. The Authority shall promote a uniform format for the reporting of data and information in
order that comparable data maybe shared more meaningfully.
3. In the drafting of documents, guidelines and plans under these Regulations,
Environmental Information shall be concise and clear.
Draft Regulation 10
Consultation in Environmental assessment, Evaluation and management
1. The Authority shall promote accountability and transparency in the assessment,
evaluation and management of Environmental Impacts from Exploitation Activities under
these Regulations.
2. To ensure that evaluations made under these Regulations are made with the widest
range of views and expert opinions, the Authority, through adequate procedures, shall
encourage and promote Consultation with and between Interested Persons in
environmental assessment and management under these Regulations, including, where
26

[Page 27]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
appropriate, the provision for open meetings of the Commission directly connected with
environmental matters.
Draft Regulation 11
Co-operation
Applicants, Contractors, Sponsoring States and other Interested Persons shall cooperate
with the Authority in the establishment and implementation of programmes to observe,
measure, evaluate and analyze the impacts of Exploitation Activities on the Marine
Environment and to share the findings and results of such programmes with the Authority for
wider dissemination, and that such co-operation and collaboration extends to the
implementation and further development of Best Environmental Practices in connection with
activities in the Area.
Draft Regulation 12
Environmental Objectives: protection and conservation of the natural resources
1. In developing Environmental Objectives for the Area, the protection and conservation of
the natural resources of the Area, including biological diversity and ecological integrity,
shall be a fundamental consideration.
2. In the development and implementation of a financial mechanism, the Authority shall
consider incentive structures, including market-based instruments, that facilitate delivery
of relevant Environmental Objectives, Environmental Targets, promotes satisfactory
Environmental Performance and supports technology development and innovation.
Draft Regulation 13
Waste minimization
In the conduct of activities in the Area, all reasonable and practicable measures in
accordance with Good Industry Practice must be taken under a Plan of Work to minimize the
generation of waste, whatever its source.
Section 3: Restrictions and prohibitions
Draft Regulation 14
Restriction on Mining Discharges38
Commentary: “Mining Discharge” is defined under “Use of terms and scope” at Schedule
1 as “the disposal, Dumping and Discharge into the Marine Environment of SWOE, made
as an integral part of, or as a direct result of activities in the Area or from shipboard
processing immediately above a mine site of minerals derived from that mine site. SWOE
is defined as sediments, wastes and other effluents [which, for the avoidance of doubt
shall include mine tailings and water evacuated from the Minerals during shipboard
processing].”
Para. 88 of the SDC Advisory Opinion states that activities in the Area and shipboard
processing “are to be seen as part of the same kind of activities”.39 The distinction is
relevant in relation to activities aboard the mining vessel (shipboard processing versus
normal ship operation) and thus a matter of jurisdictional competence between that of the
38 Requires an assessment framework e.g. London Convention and Protocol: Guidance for the
Development of Action Lists and Action Levels for Dredged Material.
39 See also Article 17(2)(f), Annex III, UNCLOS.
27

[Page 28]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Authority (and/ sponsoring State) in connection with activities in the Area and those related
to the normal operation of ships under flag State jurisdiction. The Convention on the
Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (and the
1996 London Protocol) does not apply to the disposal of wastes or other matter directly
arising from, or related to the exploration, exploitation and associated off-shore processing
of seabed mineral resources.
Mining Discharges and their related risk assessment (and clear identification of the
different sources / origins of waste) should be part of the environmental impact
assessment process and their treatment / management detailed in the environmental
management and monitoring plan (and closure plan) for evaluation by the Authority.
A clear picture of jurisdictional competence on matters relating to “dumping” and
“discharges” is needed.
Equally, does SWOE need a clearer definition? That is, what needs to be regulated by the
Authority / sponsoring States and what is / will be regulated by flag States?
Draft Regulation 15 below refers to “Emergency Dumping”. Again, there needs to be an
understanding as to the Authority’s / sponsoring State’s jurisdictional competence / limits
with regard to dumping.
1. No person [operator] engaged in activities in the Area may Discharge any SWOE into the
Marine Environment where such Discharge is a Mining Discharge, except where the
Discharge is permitted in accordance with the requirements of:
(a) these Regulations, including the recommendations of the Commission; and /
or
(b) under an approved Plan of Work.
2. In connection with any Dumping or Discharge which is not a Mining Discharge, the
provisions of [the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of
Wastes and Other Matter, done at London on 13 November 1972 and MARPOL] shall
apply.
[Draft Regulation 15
Emergency Dumping and Discharges
In connection with any vessel, installation and mining equipment connected with Exploitation
Activities, the restriction on Dumping shall not apply where the safety of human life or of a
vessel, installation and mining equipment in the Area is threatened by the complete
destruction or total loss of the vessel, installation and mining equipment in the Area, or in any
case which constitutes a danger to human life and if such Dumping appears to be the only
way of averting the threat and if there is every probability that the damage consequent upon
such dumping will be less than would otherwise occur. Such Dumping shall be so conducted
as to minimize the likelihood of damage to human life or Serious Harm to the Marine
Environment. The Authority shall in co-operation with relevant international organizations,
including the International Maritime Organization, develop the necessary rules, regulations
and procedures on Dumping and [other discharges] in the Area].
28

[Page 29]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Draft Regulation 16
Exclusion areas
No activities shall be permitted in an area:
(a) disapproved for Exploitation by the Council, in cases where Substantial
Evidence indicates the risk of Serious Harm to the Marine Environment; and
(b) otherwise designated by the Council as an area in respect of which no
Exploitation Activities shall occur according to the relevant Strategic
Environmental Management Plan developed by the Authority and approved
by the Council.
29

[Page 30]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part III – Environmental assessment
Commentary: this Part III is a first attempt to regulate an environmental impact
assessment process for exploitation activities in the Area. It will, where necessary, need to
be supported by relevant and appropriate guidelines. Albeit this Part III follows a logical
step process, environmental impact assessment is an iterative process.
Environmental assessment guidelines will need to be developed by Authority to provide
advice to applicants, experts and the public generally about specific procedures,
methodologies and the minimum requirements for environmental management which the
Authority would expect to be met by applications it receives and considers during the
environmental impact assessment process.
The guidelines should be informative and aim to deliver a consistent approach in
developing an EIA programme and delivery. However, they should not be overly
prescriptive as the onus remains on the applicant to develop comprehensive, location-
specific EIAs.40 That is, guidelines should ideally set minimum expectations of content and
quality.
Additionally, it may be helpful to apply a benchmark or statement to the effect (at least at
this stage until the full mining code is developed) that the Authority in developing any
guidelines (or these regulations) shall not apply standards which are less stringent than an
international reference standard.
For example, in connection with environmental impact assessment and management, a
number of stakeholders referred to the applicability of IFC Performance Standards and the
Equator principles. Indeed, the MMDA at Clause 10.2 states:
“Where Applicable Law and regulations on environmental and social impact assessment
and management, and pollution prevention are less stringent than the IFC Performance
Standards, the Company shall undertake its activities in a manner consistent with the IFC
Performance Standards. To remove any doubt, the Company and the State recognize that
the IFC Performance Standards outline processes to be followed enabling site-specific
environmental compliance limits to be developed, where required.”
The definition of “Good Industry Practice” under the Exploitation Regulations does make
reference to the IFC Performance Standards, but not to specific principles within those
standards.
Section 1: General
Draft Regulation 17
Environmental assessment
1. An Applicant shall conduct, or has conducted, an Environmental Impact Assessment
based on sound engineering and economic principles, conducted and prepared
according to Good Industry Practice, establishing an Environmental Baseline of
environmental conditions existing at [the date of the Application?], and assessing the
Environmental Impacts of Exploitation Activities on the Marine Environment.
40 The Gold Coast workshop in May 2016 highlighted that guidelines could deliver a certain ease of
evaluation but there is a possible danger that it might become a “box-ticking exercise” (workshop report
at para. 122).
30

[Page 31]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 above, Applicants may require the approval of the Authority
(prior environmental impact assessment) before conducting any preliminary
investigations in connection with an Environmental Impact Assessment in accordance
with the Commission’s recommendations.
Section 2: Environmental Baseline
Commentary: the Exploration Regulations require a contractor to undertake
environmental studies in accordance with those regulations, taking account of the
recommendations of the Commission. Recommendations for the guidance of contractors
for the assessment of the possible environmental impacts arising from exploration for
marine minerals in the Area,41 provides recommended baseline data requirements
together with activities requiring environmental impact assessment, notably the testing of
collection systems and equipment (test mining). As highlighted by para.19: “It is important
to note that these baseline, monitoring and impact assessment studies are likely to be the
primary inputs to the environmental impact assessment for commercial mining”.
Albeit the recommendations highlight the timing42 of the submission of any “prior EIA” for
test mining, no detailed procedure to date has been established for the review / approval
mechanism of such prior EIA. The Commission noted at its 22nd Session that an
environmental inception (scoping) report (EIR) had been received;43 however, there is no
defined process or procedure to review such EIR and thus review the adequacy of an
intended EIA.
There is currently a gap in the exploration regulatory regime with regard to a clear defined
process to handle EIRs and Prior EIAs for say test mining (an important component of the
process to determine the impacts of commercial mining activities). The LTC’s
Recommendations (or guidelines prepared by the Secretariat) should incorporate such a
process. This process could include a parallel scoping process (between a contractor and
the Authority) resulting in the production of an EIR initially. Alternatively, these regulations
could prescribe for the necessary process and procedures given the fundamental link
between exploration and exploitation.
Draft Regulation 18
Identification (delineation) of Environmental Impact Area44
Commentary: this will be challenging not least as regards indirect (secondary) impacts
e.g. the plume. While a provisional impact area(s) could be identified, it is thought that the
environmental assessment process itself will modify the area boundaries (iterative
41 ISBA/19/LTC/8, 1 March 2013. See also Standardization of Environmental Data and Information:
development of guidelines, Proceedings of the International Seabed Authority’s Workshop held in
Kingston, Jamaica, 25-29 June 2001.
42 “The contractor will submit to the Authority a plan for such testing, including the details for monitoring
the environment, at least one year before testing begins and at least three months in advance of the
annual session of the Authority”, LTC Recommendations at para. 52.
43 See Report of the Chair of the Legal and Technical Commission on the work of the Commission at its
session in 2016, ISBA/22/C/17, 13 July 2016 at para. 21.
44 The word “area” has been used rather than “zone” so as not to confuse language with preservation
reference zones and impact reference zones, being environmental management tools.
31

[Page 32]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
process). Technical assistance will be required in formulating the correct wording for this
regulation, unless this should be dealt with more appropriately in relevant guidelines.
Technical thresholds will also be relevant in defining this area. For example, in connection
with plumes and determining the boundary between areas where the plume has an impact
and the boundary point at which any impact can be discounted.45
An Applicant shall determine the geographical limits of the Environmental Impact Area(s) of
the Marine Environment likely to be affected by Exploitation Activities, including the Direct
Impact Area and Indirect Impact Area, according to the Authority’s guidelines. Such impact
areas shall be modified as necessary during the Environmental Impact Assessment process
conducted by the Applicant.
Draft Regulation 19
Environmental Baseline study
Commentary: the Commission’s recommendations relating to environmental assessment
contain guidance relating to environmental baseline studies. However, what constitutes an
“adequate” or “good” baseline? Ideally, from a legal (criteria) perspective, formulating
criteria (on a sound scientific basis) would facilitate clearer expectations on baseline / data
needs and requirements, though specific recommendations should be formulated (and be
resource-specific). Whether these criteria should be addressed in these regulations or
reflected in relevant recommendations / guidelines, requires consideration.
Furthermore, do current LTC Recommendation(s) provide for clear expectations as to
baseline data needs for exploitation?
In terms of characterizing the areas likely to be impacted there is merit in looking at (and
implementing) “marine evidence plans”. These have been developed in the United
Kingdom by the MMO. Aside from facilitating informed decision-making they aim to add
value by enhancing the consistency and direction of marine research; to encourage
integration of research efforts this maximizing resources and to provide clarity on the focus
for planned and future research. Given the critical need for adequate baseline data, the
development of marine evidence plans could give much needed direction to inform the
baseline characterization process and, with stakeholder input, provide the necessary of
confidence in baseline data.
Recommendation: Authority to review and consider the use of marine evidence plans as
a more formal and informed process to directing information needs and requirements.
1. An Applicant shall establish an adequate Environmental Baseline of the Environmental
Impact Area against which to assess the likely Environmental Impacts and to determine
the necessary measures, management objectives and responses for the effective
protection of the Marine Environment from Exploitation Activities.
45 Also known as the “mixing zone boundary”. Water quality thresholds / targets will be needed and a
consideration of the spatial extent / limitations on plumes.
32

[Page 33]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
2. An adequate Environmental Baseline study shall be conducted in accordance with the
recommendations of the Commission. In determining the adequacy of an Environmental
Baseline study [report / assessment], the following criteria shall be used, that:
a. the data collected is representative data and the number of samples collected are
proportionate to the size of the likely Environmental Impact Area and the variability,
spatial and temporal, in natural conditions and characteristics (intensity of sampling).
b. the data has been collected using standardized approaches based on Internationally
Recognized Standards and protocols.
c. the area is accurately mapped using Geographic Information System mapping.
d. that any uncertainties in Environmental Baseline information are within generally
accepted parameters.
e. is capable, within reasonable technical and economic constraints, of providing
sufficient information for an Environmental Risk Assessment; and
f. the Environmental Baseline study has been conducted and prepared in all material
respects with the recommendations of the Commission and in Consultation with
Interested Persons, particularly Appropriately Qualified Experts.
Section 3: Environmental scoping report
Commentary: a “typical” EIA process would involve an initial screening of a proposal with
a regulator to determine whether an assessment is needed or the level of assessment
required for a particular project. This working draft does not currently anticipate nor provide
a procedure for a “screening opinion’ by the Authority i.e. as to whether / what level of an
environmental impact assessment is required for specific Exploitation Activities. That is,
the expectation is that a comprehensive EIA will be required. As activities in the Area
develop and mature, specific activities (impacts) may be excluded from the scope of an
EIA following an appropriate screening procedure and as a result of known impacts
considered as not requiring EIA.46
The next level of the EIA process is one of “scoping”. This will aim to identify the relevant
impacts for assessment and is effectively the “terms of reference” for an EIA. It has merit in
its potential to reduce the length of an EIA / EIS such that the focus is on significant
matters and not insignificant issues thus narrowing the scope of a EIA/ EIS. It also has
merit for an applicant / contractor in providing a degree of certainty as to the scope of its
EIA activity and, as a result of any relevant stakeholder input, add credibility to the EIA
process.
This scoping regulation is drafted as a non-mandatory requirement and subject for further
stakeholder discussion as to its merits and appeal, pros and cons. Given the current
uncertainties surrounding DSM impacts, the effectiveness of such a scoping mechanism
should contribute to, and not weaken, a comprehensive EIA process. The content of the
Environmental Impact Statement itself (together with guidelines (to be developed)) will set
out the expectations of the EIA deliverable.
Note: there are many generic references to “the Authority” in this Part III. The functions to
46 Note: the Commission’s Recommendations for the guidance of contractors for the assessment of the
possible environmental impacts arising from exploration for polymetallic nodules in the Area
ISBA/16/LTC/7 does provide (in an exploration context) certain activities as requiring / not requiring
prior EIA.
33

[Page 34]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
be performed relate principally to the Secretariat function (Environmental / EIA unit) which
will need to take an active role in the EIA process in tandem with an applicant / contractor /
sponsoring State, including EIA scoping.
Draft Regulation 20
Environmental scoping report: preparation, review and opinion
1. An Applicant may submit a draft Environmental Scoping Report to the Authority for its
consideration and shall be prepared in accordance with the Authority’s guidelines and in
the format prescribed by Annex III.
2. An Environmental Scoping Report shall include the following information: -
(a) description of the proposed activities and its environmental objectives.
(b) description of the methodology applied to conduct the scoping.
(c) identification of the likely Environmental Impact Area.
(d) description of the existing status of the Marine Environment in the Environmental
Impact Area.
(e) identification (preliminary) of the anticipated environmental, social and cultural
impacts, including potential Cumulative Impacts, in the potentially affected area(s).
(f) indication of possible alternatives to the proposed activities, including location
alternatives and scale alternatives.
(g) identification and use of Mitigation measures.
(h) description of the most appropriate procedure to plan and develop the Exploitation
Activities.
(i) description of the process of Consultation with Interested Persons.
(j) description of the nature and scope of investigations and studies required in order to
identify and predict the Environmental Impacts.
(k) identify the Appropriately Qualified Experts to provide a review of the scope,
methodologies, findings and / or conclusions of the investigations and studies.
(l) describe the nature and scope of further investigations and studies required in order
to identify and predict the Environmental Impacts.
(m) a timeline for completion.
3. The Authority may, within 60 days of the receipt of the report, request the Applicant to
provide further information or to conduct further investigations regarding the report. The
Applicant shall supply the Authority such information within 60 days of the date of the
Authority’s request or within such time as agreed between the Authority and the Applicant
having regard to the nature of the request and the need for further investigations.
4. The Authority may seek the opinion of Appropriately Qualified Experts in respect of the
draft Environmental Scoping Report.
5. The Authority and the Applicant shall, as necessary, prepare a revised Environmental
Scoping Report which the Authority shall publish to its website for a period of 60 days
and invite comments from Interested Persons.
6. The Commission shall then consider the revised Environmental Scoping Report and
submissions received from Interested Persons at its next available meeting and may
either:
(a) request further information from the Applicant;
(b) propose any reasonable amendments to the revised Environmental Scoping Report;
and / or
34

[Page 35]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(c) provide its opinion to the Applicant that it is satisfied with the revised Environmental
Scoping Report.
7. Where an Environmental Scoping Report is prepared and the Commission has given its
opinion in respect of such report, the Authority shall not be obliged to reach any
regulatory decision unless and until the Applicant has submitted an Environmental Impact
Statement in accordance with these Regulations and the Exploitation Regulations,
containing all of the information required by the Environmental Scoping Report.
Section 4: Environmental Risk Assessment and evaluation
Commentary: risk assessment (and management) are fundamental to the effective
implementation of the Environmental Regulations / EIA process.
The purpose of this regulation is to outline a broad need for and the components of risk
assessment. It is not intended to be overly prescriptive. Guidelines will deal more
appropriately with relevant guidance on appropriate risk assessment methodologies (and
incorporated into an overall EIA process guideline). Work has already been performed in
this area and can be built and expanded upon as necessary for activities in the Area.47
Question: Environmental risk assessment or Ecological risk assessment?
Draft Regulation 21
Environmental Risk Assessment and evaluation of likely Environmental impacts
1. An Environmental Risk Assessment shall be undertaken by an Applicant in accordance
with this regulation and the Authority’s guideline document. The Environmental Risk
Assessment shall be carried out in a scientifically sound manner and adopt internationally
recognized risk assessment techniques.
2. An Environmental Risk Assessment shall:
a) identify all potential risks to the Marine Environment, including those which
appear to be insignificant risks.
b) be based on Best Available Scientific Evidence and the application of the
precautionary approach.
c) include an assessment of the scale, likelihood and consequences and thus
the risk of Serious Harm to the Marine Environment.
d) rank such possible risks in accordance with the Authority’s guidance
document as follows:
i. a potential significant risk;
ii. an uncertain risk;
iii. an insignificant risk.
3. Where a risk is identified as a potential significant risk or uncertain risk, further and
appropriate sampling, data collection and monitoring may be required by the Authority so
that more realistic assumptions and measurements can be made with a view to a more
quantitative risk assessment and re-classification of risk categories.
4. Risks classified as potential significant risks are to be assessed as to whether they are
Acceptable without further Mitigation.
47 For example: NIWA Environmental risk assessment of discharges of sediment during prospecting
and exploration for seabed minerals, January 2014. See also NIWA Preparing Environmental Impact
Assessments: provisional guidelines for offshore mining and drilling in New Zealand, September 2014.
35

[Page 36]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
5. Uncertain risks shall, where practicable, be re-classified as either potential significant
risks or insignificant risks.
6. Insignificant risks shall also be documented in the Environmental Impact Statement.
7. The burden of proof is on an Applicant to demonstrate that the risk of the Environmental
Impacts, and consequential Mitigation and management thereof, will meet the
Environmental Objectives of the Authority and that the Plan of Work is environmentally
Acceptable.
Section 5: Alternatives, Mitigation and management measures
Draft Regulation 22
Alternatives, Mitigation and management measures
1. An Applicant shall, based on the Environment Risk Assessment under Section 4 above,
assess and determine: -
(a) the alternative risk prevention or management responses for potential significant
risks that have been identified, quantified and qualified.
(b) the management measures and responses for the potential significant risk including:-
i. [the Best Practicable Environmental Option].
ii. the management measures to be applied and their predicted long-term
impact.
iii. assessment of the Residual Environmental Impact, if any, following the
successful implementation of the management measures.
iv. the timeframe and schedule for the implementation of the management
measures.
v. the responsibilities for the implementation and long-term management of
the measures (Closure Plan?).
vi. the monitoring programmes to be implemented to provide information
and data to assess the success of the implementation of the
management measures contemplated above.
Section 6: Matters to be taken into account in determining whether an activity
(or component thereof) is likely to have a significant Environmental Impact
Commentary: should these regulations provide appropriate criteria for determining the
“significance” of the impact of an activity or is this better left to a guidance document,
covering say risk assessment and the individual components of exploitation activities?
Equally, can any impact thresholds or acceptable impact criteria be established at this
stage? Or should this be a consideration for any strategic assessment process which duly
informs project-level EIAs?
Many national jurisdictions do provide a list of criteria against which to assess whether a
proposal has a significant effect on the environment. For example, Western Australia
prescribes for a “significance test”. Under that regime, the EPA will take the following
matters into consideration:48
(a) values, sensitivity and quality of the environment which is likely to be
impacted;
48 See Environmental Impact Assessment (Part IV Divisions 1 and 2) Administrative Procedures 2012
at clause 7.
36

[Page 37]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(b) extent (intensity, duration, magnitude and geographic footprint) of the
likely impacts;
(c) consequence of the likely impacts (or change);
(d) resilience of the environment to cope with the impacts or change;
(e) cumulative impact with other projects;
(f) level of confidence in the prediction of impacts and the success of
proposed mitigation;
(g) objects of the Act, policies, guidelines, procedures and standards against
which a proposal can be assessed;
(h) presence of strategic planning policy framework;
(i) presence of other statutory decision-making processes which regulate the
mitigation of the potential effects on the environment to meet the EPA’s
objectives and principles for EIA; and
(j) public concern about the likely effect of the proposal, if implemented, on
the environment.
(The above matters do however relate to whether a particular proposal, that has been
referred to the EPA, should be assessed).
37

[Page 38]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part IV – Preparation of Environmental Plans
Section 1: General
Draft Regulation 23
Applicant to comply with relevant guidelines and Regulations
An Application for approval of a Plan of Work for Exploitation shall be accompanied by the
environmental documents listed in regulation 4(4)(b), (e), (g) and (h) of the Exploitation
Regulations and be prepared in accordance with these Regulations and the Authority’s
guidelines.
Draft Regulation 24
Authority’s right to request separate Environmental Plans by Mining Area
Commentary: requires development of criteria based on characteristics relating to the
physical, chemical, ecosystem, habitat and communities (receiving environment), scale of
activities, proximity of areas etc. Where these are sufficiently similar, the Authority could
permit a single set of plans (with each mining area described under separate chapter
headings) with the onus on the applicant to demonstrate “sufficiently similar” in accordance
with guidelines.49
Note: whatever approach is taken with regard to separate plans, a robust environmental
impact assessment process is the primary requirement.
1. The Authority may, according to its application guidelines, accept a single set of
Environmental Plans from an Applicant in respect of proposed mining activities at
different locations within a proposed Plan of Work or may request separate
Environmental Plans for each Mining Area detailed in a proposed Plan of Work.
2. Where the Authority requires further information to determine the form of the application,
the Authority shall within 30 days after the Application is made and by notice in writing
require the Applicant to furnish such further information in writing.
Draft Regulation 25
Notice in respect of application for approval of Plan of Work
The Authority, in accordance with regulation 35, shall within 30 days of receipt of an
application for approval of a Plan of Work for Exploitation, cause public notice of the
Application on the Authority’s website together with an outline of the evaluation process of
the Environmental Plans, including the opportunity for Interested Persons to make
submissions in accordance with these Regulations.
Section 2: Environmental Impact Statement
Commentary: Annex II will include the ISA EIS template as soon as this is finalized.50
While that template will prescribe the detailed categories of data and information, this
regulation should prescribe for the core components of the EIS. Furthermore, while the
49 This should however become clear during any scoping process and discussions with the Authority as
to specific requirements.
50 Further work was undertaken on the EIS template at the Gold Coast workshop in May 2016. A further
review of the template is also an agenda item at the Berlin workshop in March 2017.
38

[Page 39]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
template shows the detailed categories, the level of detail required for each is unclear,
including the appropriate methods and standards used / to be used to acquire data. The
ISA will need to develop guidelines (or a best practice EIA manual) providing clear
expectations for each item category.
Draft Regulation 26
Preparation of Environmental Impact Statement
1. An Applicant shall prepare an Environmental Impact Statement in accordance with this
Section 2.
2. The Environmental Impact Statement shall be in the form prescribed by the Authority at
Annex II to these Regulations and shall:
(a) be in accordance with the Authority’s guidelines.
(b) be based on the Environment Impact Assessment conducted according to
Part III of these Regulations and, where applicable, in accordance with the
Environmental scoping report under regulation 20 above.
(c) be in accordance with the objectives and measures of the Authority’s
relevant Strategic Environmental Management Plan.
(d) be prepared in accordance with Good Industry Practice and with regard to
the guiding principles under Part II Section 2 of these Regulations.
(e) be prepared in plain language, being an official language of the Sponsoring
State(s) together with, where applicable, an official English language version.
(f) provide relevant and sufficient information, as corresponds to the scale and
potential magnitude of the Exploitation Activities and the associated
Environmental Impacts, to assess the likely impacts, including Cumulative
Impacts, of the proposed Exploitation Activities in the Environmental Impact
Area together with the necessary information to support conclusions and
findings.
(g) be accompanied by the report of Appropriately Qualified Experts verifying its
contents and assessing its conclusions.
(h) include a non-technical summary of the main conclusions and information
provided to facilitate understanding of the nature of the activity by Interested
Persons.
3. An Environmental Impact Statement will be subject to a review process involving
Interested Persons under Part VI of these Regulations.
Draft Regulation 32
Information requirements for the Environmental Impact Statement
Commentary: The information requirements stipulated in this draft regulation need to be
cross checked against the EIS template in due course. It is usual practice in most national
jurisdictions to prescribe for the minimum information requirements in secondary legislation
such as regulations together with the preparation of industry-specific guidelines.
1. An Environmental Impact Statement shall include the following contents:
39

[Page 40]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(a) a description of the proposed Exploitation Activities covered by the Plan of
Work including the location, phasing, duration and intensity of the proposed
activities and Environmental Objectives.
(b) an outline of the possible alternative locations for, or methods for
undertaking the activity that may Mitigate any adverse effects studied by the
Applicant, including the main reasons for the Applicant’s choice of location
and method, taking into account the technical and economic feasibility and
Environmental Impacts of any such alternatives.
(c) a description of the initial Environmental Baseline reference point against
which predicted impacts are to be compared [and a prediction of the future
environmental baseline reference point in the absence of the proposed
Exploitation Activities].
(d) identification of the Environmental Impact Area.
(e) an assessment of the Marine Environment likely to be impacted by the
proposed Exploitation Activities as follows: -
i. Direct Impacts.
ii. Indirect Impacts.
iii. Cumulative Impacts.
iv. Short-term, medium-term and long-term effects.
v. Permanent and temporary effects.
vi. Positive and negative effects.
(f) a risk assessment of the nature, extent, duration, probability and significance
of the identified potential environmental, social and cultural impacts of the
proposed Exploitation Activities, including Cumulative Impacts under (e)
above and evaluated in accordance with regulation 21.
(g) a description of the methods and data used to forecast the Environmental
Impacts of the proposed Exploitation Activities including, where applicable,
reference to the standards and protocols recommended and/or adopted by
the Authority.
(h) a determination of the appropriate Mitigation measures that are technically
and economically feasible for each potentially significant adverse impact of
the proposed Exploitation Activities to prevent, reduce and offset such
impacts.
(i) identification of the management and Monitoring measures, including
appropriate Environmental Targets (environmental indicators51), to both
Monitor the effectiveness of the Mitigation measures and to detect
unforeseen Environmental Impacts and that could provide early warning of
Unforeseen Serious Harm to the Marine Environment resulting from the
Exploitation Activities as well as to deal promptly and effectively with likely
Incidents.
(j) details of the quantity, nature and source of proposed Mining Discharges
during the period of the Exploitation Activities.
51 Environmental indicators would include setting targets / benchmarks for the physical, chemical or
biological characteristics of the area to be impacted and appropriate monitoring against those
benchmarks in IRZs and PRZs and action points determined. As knowledge of impacts and
consequential effects advance, the nature and level of the activity can be used to set appropriate
benchmarks.
40

[Page 41]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(k) identification of unavoidable Environmental Impacts and likely biological
response.
(l) consideration of the effects of the proposed Exploitation Activities on other
users of the Marine Environment, including third parties undertaking or
proposing to undertake Exploitation Activities in the adjacent areas.
(m) details of the Consultation process followed with Interested Persons during
the course of the Environmental Impact Assessment, a summary of issues
raised and how such issues, if any, have been addressed.
(n) details of the social impacts, socio-economic development factors and
impacts, if any, on the cultural heritage.
(o) details of the environmental policy and Environmental Management System
adopted or to be adopted by the Applicant at the entity and operating levels.
(p) details of the knowledge gaps and report on the adequacy of predictive
methods, underlying assumptions and uncertainties encountered in
compiling the necessary information, including details of any evaluation
based on theoretical approaches or research methods generally accepted in
the scientific community.
(q) in connection with any incomplete or unavailable information in evaluating a
reasonably foreseeable significant Environmental Impact:
i. identify further research or studies that are being undertaken and
associated timeline for completion; and / or
ii. where such information is not obtainable without excessive cost or
the means to obtain it are not known, make a statement that such
information is incomplete or not available and the reasons.
(r) demonstrate how, where applicable, the Precautionary Approach has been
interpreted and applied in the conduct of an Environmental Impact
Assessment and in the preparation of the Environmental Impact Statement,
the rationale for its application and, where applicable, the precautionary
measures proposed.
(s) discussion of the methodologies used with reference to scientific, technical
and other information in support of the information requirements above.
(t) identification of further research or studies that are being undertaken and
associated timeline for completion.
(u) statement on how the objectives and requirements of the relevant Strategic
Environmental Management Plan will be addressed.
(v) identification of impacts regulated by other bodies or agencies, including
Sponsoring States and flag States and the details of any approval or
compliance requirements satisfied or to be satisfied.
2. The Environmental Impact Statement shall provide for the full and fair discussion of the
potential Environmental Impacts. Such impacts shall be discussed in proportion to their
significance. Where an Applicant considers an impact to be of no significance, there
should be sufficient information to evidence such conclusion or a brief discussion as to
why further research is not warranted.
Section 3: Environmental Management System
Commentary: this regulation sets the benchmark for an Environmental Management
System equivalent to the principles of ISO 14001:2015 but will allow for the consideration
41

[Page 42]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
of equivalent systems e.g. the EU Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS). The
Authority may wish to list other acceptable national / regional equivalents for clarity.
Aside from an EMS being of an international standard, it should be capable of
implementation at the operational / site-specific level, including that of agents and sub-
contractors of a contractor.
Draft Regulation 28
Requirements for Environmental Management System
1. An Applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Authority that it has adopted or
will adopt and use an Environmental Management System that is in accordance with this
regulation and the principles of Internationally Recognized Standards.
2. Environmental Management Systems shall be designed to achieve and maintain:
a. the Environmental Targets and the effective protection of the Marine
Environment from the impacts of mining activities and Pollution as identified
in an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan.
b. a continuous improvement in Environmental Performance.
c. the delivery of the objectives and measures of the relevant Strategic
Environmental Management Plan.
3. Where an Applicant possesses or proposes to implement an Environmental Management
System which is not equivalent to the principles of ISO 14001:2015, the Authority may,
but shall not be obliged, to consider any alternative Environmental Management System
provided that such system(s):
a. are in accordance with Good Industry Practice and Internationally
Recognized Standards.
b. are capable of delivering site-specific environmental objectives and
Environmental Targets in an Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan.
c. are capable of cost-effective, independent auditing by recognized and
accredited international or national organizations; and
d. permit effective reporting to the Authority in connection with Environmental
Performance.
4. The Authority may require verification by an Appropriately Qualified Expert that the
Environmental Management System used or to be used by an Applicant is in accordance
with the principles under paragraph 3. above.
Section 4: Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
Commentary: The purpose of an EMMP is two-fold. First, it provides direction and focus
to a contractor’s environmental management of its exploitation operations. It is based on
the outcomes of the EIA process (which must be dynamic as new learnings emerge).
There should ideally be a standardization, and thus comparability, in assessment and
monitoring. Secondly, it also provides a reference point for the Authority, as regulator, for
inspection and enforcement purposes. An approved EMMP will form part of the Plan of
Work and will be annexed to an Exploitation Contract.
There are 3 implementation stages of an EMMP: mitigation measures, monitoring the
42

[Page 43]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
impacts of potential significance or uncertainty and an evaluation (and revision) process
being a product of monitoring and assessment. This is particularly crucial for monitoring
cumulative impacts which may be uncertain or unknown at the time of the completion of
the initial EIS / EMMP. The need for a regular (and prescribed review period) of an EMMP
is paramount as is an Authority / sponsoring State-driven independent auditing process.
Timing of delivery: draft regulation 4(5) of the Exploitation Regulations states: “The
Commission may permit the delivery and submission of the Environmental Management
and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan at a date later to that of the original application.”
This has drawn some concern in the stakeholder community that (i) an EMMP may not be
in place prior to the commencement of mining activities and (ii) that an EMMP is not then
subject to same level of public scrutiny as an EIS.
The draft wording above is to reflect a reality: that while an initial / draft EMMP may be
prepared based on the EIA/EIS, it may be some time before a revised EMMP can be
delivered as technology is further developed, constructed and further assessments
conducted, including the likely full-scale testing of equipment prior to the commencement
of commercial mining activities. (The same is equally true of a Closure Plan, though the
finalization of this Plan will be some way down the line).
Furthermore, the regulations need to recognize the commercial realities. Investors /
institutions are unlikely to commit funds for the bankable feasibility stage and construction
until there is an approved Plan of Work in place.
This working draft (and the Exploitation Regulations will need to be harmonized
accordingly) provides that no exploitation activities52 will commence until approved plans
are in place (see Draft Regulation 43(3)). One of the conditions attaching to any
recommendation by the Commission / approval by the Council of a Plan of Work will be the
delivery and approval of a revised EMMP / revised Closure Plan. It should be recognized
that while the EMMP is a crucial document, much of its initial content will be derived from
the EIA/EIS which will be the subject of detailed review and scrutiny.
Such a process follows land-based practices.
Questions
 Current drafting is on the basis of a single EMMP. However, is this correct or will
there be a series of sub-plans (collectively an EMMP) dealing with specific
components of the marine environment?
 Where environmental impacts have the potential to effect areas beyond the
boundary of a Contract Area / Mining Area, what permissions should the Authority
grant to a contractor to collect environmental data (monitoring) beyond its contract
area? Or should there simply be an obligation placed on contractors to co-operate
in both the collection of data and the reasonable placing of monitoring stations
outside a contract area etc.?
52 The definition of “Exploitation Activities” may need to be revisited / a definition of “Mining Activities”
included so that it is made clear which activities may not commence until the necessary plans are in
place. That is, “Exploitation Activities” includes “construction” and “other preparatory steps” which may
not have environmental impact and need to progress.
43

[Page 44]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Draft Regulation 29
Preparation of Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
1. An Applicant shall prepare an initial Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan in
accordance with this Section 4.
2. An Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan shall be in the form prescribed by
the Authority at Annex III to these Regulations and shall:
(a) be in accordance with the Authority’s guidelines.
(b) be based on the Environment Impact Assessment conducted according to
Part III of these Regulations.
(c) be in accordance with the Authority’s relevant Strategic Environmental
Management Plan.
(d) be prepared in accordance with Good Industry Practice and with regard to
the guiding principles under Part II Section 2 of these Regulations.
(e) be prepared in plain language, being an official language of the Sponsoring
State(s) together, where applicable, an official English language version.
(f) be verified by the report of Appropriately Qualified Experts approved by the
Authority.
(g) include a non-technical summary of the main conclusions and information
provided to facilitate understanding by Interested Persons.
3. The initial Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan will be subject to a review
process by Interested Persons under Part VI below.
4. Where the Commission permits delivery of a final Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan at a date later to that of the original application under regulation 4(5) of
the Exploitation Regulations, the Applicant shall deliver such final plan to the Authority at
least 6 calendar months prior to the commencement of mining activities in the relevant
Mining Area.
Draft Regulation 30
Information requirements for the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
1. An Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan shall include the following contents:
(a) a description of the Marine Environment likely to be affected by the proposed
Exploitation Activities.
(b) the environmental objectives.
(c) details of the Environmental Management System and the Applicant’s
environmental policy.
(d) an assessment of the potential impacts of the proposed Exploitation
Activities on the Marine Environment, including socio-economic conditions
and cultural heritage, where applicable.
(e) a summary of the assessment of the significance of the potential
Environmental Impacts and the proposed Mitigation measures and
management control procedures and responses to minimise adverse
Environmental Impacts consistent with the Environmental Impact
Assessment and Environmental Targets.
(f) the planned Monitoring programme and performance assessment of the
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan, including environmental
objectives set and the necessary risk assessment and management
techniques to achieving the desired outcomes.
44

[Page 45]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(g) the location, and planned monitoring and management of Preservation
Reference Zones and Impact Reference Zones.
(h) a training programme for all persons engaged or to be engaged in activities
in the Area by or on behalf of the Applicant.
(i) details of the plan for review and environmental audit.
(j) [other].
Section 5: Closure Plan
Draft Regulation 31
Purpose of Closure Plan
1. A Closure Plan shall set out the responsibilities of a contractor for the decommissioning
and closure of activities in a Mining Area, including the post closure management and
monitoring of Residual and Natural Environmental Effects. Closure also includes a
temporary suspension in mining activities, such as the placing of an operation on care
and maintenance.
2. The objective of a Closure Plan is to ensure that:
(a) at the date of cessation or suspension of mining activities in a Mining Area, a
management and Monitoring plan is in place for the period prescribed in the Closure
Plan.
(b) considerations relating to any such cessation or closure are made and a process is in
place throughout the life of the mining activities.
(c) that the risks relating to Environmental Impacts are quantified, assessed and
managed including the gathering of information relevant to such closure or
suspension.
(d) the necessary health and safety requirements are complied with.
(e) Residual Environmental Effects are identified and quantified.
(f) any Restoration or rehabilitation commitments will be fulfilled in accordance with
predetermined criteria or standards.
(g) the mining activities are closed or suspended efficiently and cost-effectively; and
(h) Good Industry Practices are identified and developed for the benefit of future mining
activities, the industry and mankind as a whole.
Draft Regulation 32
Information requirements for the Closure Plan
1. An Applicant shall prepare an initial Closure Plan in the format prescribed by Annex IV to
these Regulations, be in accordance with the Authority’s guidelines and the relevant
Strategic Environmental Management Plan.
2. A Closure Plan shall contain:
(a) a description of decommissioning on the cessation of or suspension in
mining activities.
(b) the environmental objectives for any such cessation or suspension.
(c) the on-going plan for the management and monitoring of the Marine
Environment after such cessation or suspension.
(d) the management and monitoring of the Marine Environment following the
temporary suspension of mining activities.
(e) the technical and economic feasibility of any restorative measures and
rehabilitation of the affected area.
45

[Page 46]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
3. A Closure Plan shall specify the period during which the plan will be required. An
Applicant shall determine such period in consultation with the Authority. The period shall
be determined by reference to a specified day, on achieving a specified event or
Environmental Target or compliance with specified standards.
4. The initial Closure Plan will be subject to a review process by Interested Persons under
Part VI below.
5. The initial Closure Plan shall be reviewed and revised in accordance with Parts VIII and
XII below during the term of the Exploitation Contract.
Section 6: Emergency Response and Contingency Plan
 [In accordance with Exploitation Regulations but see Annex V]
46

[Page 47]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part V - Preliminary review of the Environmental Plans by the Authority
Commentary: the provision below is a procedural safeguard to ensure that an application
is compliant with the Authority’s RRPs. In practice the Authority (Secretariat) should work
in parallel with an Applicant (and sponsoring States) so that when an application is made it
has already been subject to scrutiny by the Authority.
Draft Regulation 33
Review of Application for Approval of a Plan of Work: Preliminary review by the
Authority
1. The Authority shall review the Environmental Plans within 60 days of receipt of an
application for approval of a Plan of Work and ensure that they conform to and have
been prepared in accordance with these Regulations and the Authority’s guidelines and
that an Applicant has made all reasonable efforts to provide the information required.
2. The Authority may require the Applicant to provide any further information that it
considers relevant to the plan(s) or where the Authority finds that the plan(s) do not
conform to these Regulations, it shall notify the Applicant, indicating its reasons for any
amendments to the plan(s). The Applicant may, within 45 days, re-submit modified plan(s)
to the Authority.
3. The Authority may request the opinion of Appropriately Qualified Experts in connection
with the submitted plans provided that such request is dealt with timeously and will not
unduly delay the processing of the application for approval of a Plan of Work, is made
with the knowledge of the Applicant and a copy of any opinion is supplied to the Applicant
and made publicly available.
47

[Page 48]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part VI - Publicity and Consultation
Commentary: while the process below anticipates a formal and structured consultation
process by the Authority, an Applicant should have undertaken appropriate levels of
consultation with the “public” including experts during the EIA process. Details of such
consultation should be reflected in the EIS.
This Part VI presents one option for consideration. The practicalities, logistics, cost and
consequential effectiveness of a review process must be evaluated.
Question: Who pays for public participation? Should the Authority establish a fund to
facilitate this?
Draft Regulation 34
General
1. Prior to the Commission’s assessment of Applicants under regulation 8 of the
Exploitation Regulations, the Authority shall ensure in accordance with its guidelines and
pursuant to this Part VI, that an early and effective Consultation process is undertaken
with Interested Persons on the possible effects of Exploitation Activities in the Area on
the Marine Environment.
2. Such Consultation shall include:
(a) the opportunity for Interested Persons to be consulted in the environmental
evaluation process and to whom comments, opinions or questions may be
addressed.
(b) that when evaluation is made under these Regulations, due account is taken
of the outcome of such Consultation with Interested Persons; and
(c) that the Authority informs Interested Persons about the evaluation made, the
reasons for any recommendations and the matters taken into consideration
in making the evaluation including information relating to the Consultation
process.
Draft Regulation 35
Public notification of application for approval of a Plan of Work and access to
Environmental Plans
1. The Authority shall, by way of a notice on its website and through other electronic media,
make known that an application for approval of Plan of Work including the Environmental
Plans has been made to the Authority.
2. Such notice will: -
(a) provide details of the Applicant.
(b) a statement of the nature, size and location of the proposed Exploitation
Activities.
(c) invite Interested Persons to submit comments in writing in and in accordance
with the review procedures reflected in this Part VI to these Regulations and the
Authority’s guideline on a Consultation process.
(d) outline such process, including timelines.
(e) prescribe the format of any submissions by Interested Persons to facilitate
efficiency in the review of such submissions by the Authority.
(f) provide information on access to copies of the plans and to other Environmental
Information relevant to the plans.
48

[Page 49]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(g) state that all submissions by Interested Persons will be made publicly available,
unless a request for confidentiality is made.
(h) provide relevant address and contact details for any submission.
Draft Regulation 36
Review of the Environmental Plans by Interested Persons
1. Where the Authority is satisfied that the plans are complete and satisfactory in
accordance with Part V to these Regulations, the plans together with other relevant
Environmental Information will be made available for public inspection at the Authority’s
website for a period of 60 Days. During this period, comments, opinions, questions may
be submitted by Interested Persons to the Secretary-General on behalf of the
Commission.
2. The Authority shall, in its reasonable opinion, determine whether the submission or
representation made is relevant to the plans according to its guidelines. If the Authority
concludes that the submission or representation is not relevant to the Application, it need
not have any further regard to such submission.
3. An Applicant shall, at any time during the review period, make known to the Authority any
material changes to the plans as the result of new knowledge or information. The
Authority shall evaluate such changes and, where appropriate, make such information
publicly available.
Draft Regulation 37
Applicant’s response to submissions by Interested Persons
1. Following the close of the Consultation period, the Authority shall provide a copy of all
relevant submissions to the Applicant.
2. In consultation with the Authority, the Applicant may make an arrangement to address
the submission either directly with Interested Persons or to provide the Authority with
such information as is reasonably required to adequately address the relevant
submission. In either case, the Applicant shall take such action as is necessary to
address the relevant submission made within 60 days of the date of the determination by
the Authority.
3. The Applicant may clarify, review or modify its Application for approval of a Plan of Work
to address issues raised by Interested Persons.
Draft Regulation 38
Authority’s review and report on submissions
1. The Authority shall review the relevant submissions from Interested Persons together
with the responses to such submissions and any modified plans submitted by the
Applicant.
2. The Authority shall prepare an assessment report for the Commission containing:
(a) an overview of the Application and a summary of pertinent issues including
an assessment of the Environmental Impacts and associated management
and Mitigation measures.
(b) an assessment of the adequacy of Environmental Baseline information.
(c) an outline of the methodologies used by the Applicant, including its
Environmental Risk Assessment methodology.
49

[Page 50]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(d) an outline of any uncertainties in the plans relating to lack of information or
knowledge and how the precautionary approach has been applied by the
Applicant together with any proposed precautionary measures.
(e) an outline of the public review process conducted and a list of submissions
received, categorized by stakeholder category.
(f) detail the issues raised by Interested Persons and the Applicant’s responses
and information provided.
(g) advice or opinions received from Appropriately Qualified Experts engaged by
the Authority.
(h) details of any proposed amendments to the application for approval of a Plan
of Work following Consultation process.
3. The Authority shall complete the assessment report for the Commission at least 30 days
prior to the next meeting of the Commission and shall make such report publicly available.
50

[Page 51]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part VII - Consideration of the Environmental Plans by the Legal and
Technical Commission
Section 1: General
Draft Regulation 39
General
The Commission shall examine and consider applications in accordance with regulation 7 of
the Exploitation Regulations. For the purposes of this Part VII, such examination shall include
the following documents: -
(a) the assessment report prepared by the Authority [Secretariat] under regulation 38
above.
(b) the Applicant’s Environmental Impact Statement(s).
(c) the Applicant’s initial Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan.
(d) the Applicant’s initial Closure Plan.
(e) the Emergency Response and Contingency Plan.
(f) the submissions received following the review of the plans by Interested Persons
under Part VI to these Regulations; and
(g) other relevant information in connection with the plans in (b) to (e) above, including
any advice received from Appropriately Qualified Experts.
Section 2: Process and procedure for recommendations relating to the
evaluation of the Environmental Plans by the Commission
Draft Regulation 40
Facilitating involvement of Interested Persons in environmental decision-making
Commentary: The Authority will need to develop appropriate rules of procedure for open
meetings, the conduct of such meetings and who should attend such meetings. In terms of
logistics and practicalities, observers to the Authority, representatives from Member States
& Sponsoring States, the Applicant and Appropriately Qualified Experts involved in the
preparation of the plans or providing opinions, should have access. The procedure should
also govern the exclusion of confidential matters from open discussion. Equally, the
procedure should afford an applicant a fair opportunity to respond to questions and points
raised by the Commission and by others attending a meeting / hearing. Access to
Environmental Information and the plans is a pre-requisite under the data management
and data sharing mechanism / strategy.
The Authority shall make diligent efforts to involve affected parties in the evaluation process
relating to the Environmental Plans and related Environmental Information pertaining to the
Plan of Work and the Area, including timely access to relevant Environmental Information
and timely notification of open meetings to be held by the Commission in respect of
Environmental Evaluation.
51

[Page 52]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Draft Regulation 41
Matters to be taken into account by the Commission
Commentary: it is self-evident from the complexity of evaluating a Plan of Work for
exploitation, that there will need be to be a re-think of the operational practices (including
appropriate skill sets and resourcing) of the Secretariat, the Commission and the Council.53
How long will a Plan of Work take to complete? How long will a Plan of Work take to
evaluate, assess and review? How many Plans of Work will be under evaluation at any
one time? (And how will this translate into monitoring, compliance and enforcement?).
What benchmarks can be set from land-based / O&G regimes?
Inherent in these regulations is an adequately staffed Secretariat and flexibility in the
timings and meetings of the Commission54: the substance of the regulations needs to drive
the form and functioning of the Authority.
Timelines are of significance in the application process and will need to be assessed,
revised and harmonized across all sets of regulations in due course.
The Commission, in considering an Applicant’s financial capability and technical capability
and other matters prescribed by regulation 8 of the Exploitation Regulations, in particular that
a Plan of Work provides for the effective protection of the Marine Environment, shall take
account of the following in relation to an Evaluation of the adequacy of the Environmental
Plans submitted as part of such Plan of Work and its implementation: -
(a) the Rules of the Authority.
(b) the guiding principles listed in Part II, Section 2 to these Regulations.
(c) the relevant Strategic Environmental Management Plan.
(d) the Environmental Impacts, Direct and Indirect, spatial and temporal, including
Cumulative Impacts (from the proposed Mining Area itself and in combination with
other mining activities).
(e) the importance of protecting biological diversity and marine ecosystems.
(f) the importance of protecting Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems and habitats.
(g) the social impacts and cultural heritage.
(h) current knowledge (Best Available Scientific Evidence), technology and the adoption
of Best Environmental Practices.
(i) the use and application of Internationally Recognized Standards, protocols and
methodologies.
(j) Good Industry Practice in relation to Exploitation Activities in the area.
(k) the effect of measures, either in whole or part, to Mitigate any adverse effects on the
Marine Environment.
(l) submissions made by a Sponsoring State(s).
(m) the relevant submissions made in respect of the Environmental Plans by Interested
Persons and any resulting modifications to the plans.
53 The Article 154 highlights these matters particularly in connection with Recommendation Nos. 5, 10,
17, 18, 25, and 26.
54 Recommendation No. 18 of the Article 154 review speaks specifically to the operational practice of
the Commission and alternative ways of working.
52

[Page 53]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(n) any advice or reports sought from Appropriately Qualified Experts in respect of the
plans to verify, clarify or substantiate the information provided, methodology used or
conclusions drawn by the Applicant.
(o) other users of the marine environment, including adjacent third party Exploration or
Exploitation Activities.
(p) any uncertainties or inadequacies in the data or information available, the application
of the Precautionary Approach and relevant precautionary measures.
(q) the use, where applicable, of an Adaptive Management approach.
(r) the capacity of the Applicant to Monitor key environmental parameters and
ecosystem components so as to identify any adverse effects of mining activities and
to provide for the modification of management and operating procedures as may be
necessary in the light of the results of Monitoring or increased knowledge of the
receiving Marine Environment.
(s) the adequacy of Environmental Management Systems to deliver the environmental
objectives and Environmental Targets.
(t) the technology and procedures necessary to provide for safe operations and
compliance with the terms of the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
and the Closure Plan.
(u) the capacity of the Applicant to respond effectively to Incidents, particularly those
with potential environmental effects in accordance with the Emergency Response
and Contingency Plan.
(v) where applicable, the previous environmental record of responsibility of the Applicant.
(w) any further information supplied by the Applicant prior to and during the period of the
Commission’s evaluation; and
(x) the recommended modification or amendment of the Plan of Work in accordance
with regulation 9 of the Exploitation Regulations and Section 3 below and the extent
to which such amendments and modifications (the conditions) will contribute toward
Best Environmental Practices, the Precautionary Approach, Mitigation Measures, the
Environmental Performance of the Applicant and the objectives of the Convention.
Section 3: Amendments, modifications (the conditions) attaching to the Plan of
Work in respect of Environmental Matters
Draft Regulation 42
Amendments and modifications of the Environmental Plans
1. The Commission may, in accordance with regulation 9 of the Exploitation Regulations,
request an Applicant to amend or modify its Application or propose specific amendments
for consideration by the Applicant with respect to such matters as contemplated by these
Regulations or as considered necessary or expedient for the purposes of the effective
protection of the Marine Environment in accordance with Good Industry Practice, having
due regard to the state of development of activities in the Area.
2. The Commission shall give due regard to the reasonableness of any proposed
amendment or modification (the condition(s)) and the technical and economic constraints
of such amendment or modification.
3. Following the Commission’s evaluation of the adequacy of the Environmental Plans, the
Commission shall consider the following in connection regulation 41(w) above, unless
such conditions have already been proposed by the Applicant and evaluated by the
Commission: -
53

[Page 54]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(a) obtain and maintain a specific category or specific amount of insurance.
(b) specific tests and / or environmental Monitoring to be conducted and specific
reporting on the results of such tests and / or Monitoring.
(c) the appointment of an observer to monitor the Exploitation Activities and their effects
on the Marine Environment.
(d) the provision of an Environmental Performance Guarantee in accordance with
regulation 44 below.
(e) specific Environmental Performance objectives and / or specific Environmental
Targets.
(f) specific conditions on Mining Discharges.
(g) specific environmental auditing and verification requirements conducted by
Appropriately Qualified Experts.
(h) the duration of any proposed amendments and timing of their review.
(i) where applicable, conditions relating to an Adaptive Management approach under
Part IX Section 1 to these Regulations.
(j) the timing of any proposed review of the Environmental Plans.
(k) the delivery of, where applicable, a revised Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan and revised Closure Plan in accordance with regulation 43 below.
4. Where the Commission proposes any amendment to or conditions on the Environmental
Plans, the Commission shall provide the Applicant a brief justification and rationale for
such proposed amendment.
Section 4: Delivery of a revised Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan and revised Closure Plan
Draft Regulation 43
Procedure for the delivery of the revised Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan and revised Closure Plan
1. The Commission shall agree the date for the delivery of the revised Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan and revised Closure Plan together with the details of
any further work to be performed by an Applicant or Contractor. Such date shall not
exceed the period under regulation 29(4) above.
2. Within 30 days of receiving the final plans, the Authority shall: -
(a) determine the plans meet the criteria and requirements determined by the Council,
based on the Commission’s recommendations, and is approved.
(b) advise the Applicant that amendments are required; and / or
(c) advise the Applicant of a timeframe extension for further evaluation of the plan
including possible assessment by Appropriately Qualified Expert(s); and / or
(d) place the final plans on its website for a period of 30 days and invite any comments
from Interested Persons in connection with the final plans.
3. A Contractor shall not commence mining activities in the Contract Area until such time
that the Authority has approved, in writing, the revised Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan(s) and revised Closure Plan(s).
Section 5: Environmental Performance Guarantee (“environmental bond”)
Commentary: the rationale for an environmental performance guarantee (or so-called
“environmental bond”) requires further elaboration. In a land-based context, such a bond
54

[Page 55]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
aims to secure compliance for remediation, rehabilitation, removal of equipment etc. In the
context of mining activities in the Area, vessels and equipment are mobile and the
technical feasibility of restoration of the seafloor is not considered viable (currently).
However, there will be a need for monitoring impacts in the longer-term following the
cessation (or suspension) of mining activities relating to loss of habitat, recolonization in
preservation areas, impact of sedimentation and the potential for restoration, to the extent
practicable, of any unexpected adverse impacts. Equally, for what period should, say, post
closure monitoring obligations be the responsibility of a contractor versus responsibility
under say the environmental liability trust fund?
Note: the rationale and content in this regulation has yet to be fully articulated across the
stakeholder base. While in principle the provision of a bond is prudent and good practice
under land-based regimes, the full payment regime package is under discussion55
(together with the related development of the rules relating to responsibility and liability in
the Area). Consideration of other market-related instruments / economic incentives is
required and the mix as to what best suits the Area regime, discussed and adopted.
Draft Regulation 44
Provision for a Financial Guarantee or Security
1. The Council, based on the recommendations of the Commission and Good Industry
Practice, may require an Applicant to lodge with the Authority a Financial Guarantee or
Security (the Environmental Performance Guarantee) in favour of the Authority, the
repayment of which is conditional on a Contractor taking specified action within a
prescribed period to achieve compliance under these regulations including
implementation of the Closure Plan.
2. The Council shall impose a condition requiring provision of an Environmental
Performance Guarantee where such imposition is justified in view of:
(a) the degree of risk of Serious Harm to the Marine Environment associated with the
mining activities contemplated under the Plan of Work.
(b) the likelihood of action being required by the Authority to make good any resulting
damage to the Marine Environment.
(c) to secure fulfilment of the post closure monitoring obligations of a Contractor detailed
in the Closure Plan; or
(d) in connection with Emergency Orders under Part XV to these Regulations.
3. A Contractor shall make provision for an Environmental Performance Guarantee by no
later than [the Effective Date / Prior to the commencement of mining activities in the
Contract Area], save that where the Commission recommends and the Council approves,
the quantum of an Environmental Performance Guarantee may be provided by way of
instalment over a specified period.
4. The quantum of an Environmental Performance Guarantee contemplated by this
regulation shall be an amount that in the reasonable opinion of the Authority reflects the
total of the likely costs (including those relating to contingency measures under regulation
80), expenses, loss and damage that may be incurred as a result of failure by a
55 See Conference Report on the Deep Seabed Mining Payment Regime Workshop (San Diego, 17-18
May 2016). Available at https://www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Pubs/2016/DSM-ConfRep.pdf.
55

[Page 56]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Contractor to satisfy the conditions of discharge or repayment of the Environmental
Performance Guarantee and shall continue to be sufficient to ensure that all steps in the
Closure Plan can be completed in a satisfactory manner should the Contractor fail to
implement the Closure Plan.
5. The Environmental Performance Guarantee shall be in a form approved by the Authority
according to regulation 10 of the Exploitation Regulations and on such terms and
conditions approved by the Council according to the Authority’s guidelines.
6. The quantum of the Environmental Performance Guarantee shall be reviewed and,
where applicable, recalculated: -
(a) annually by the Contractor and based on any change(s) to the Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan; and
(b) by the Authority and the Contractor at the time of the review of the Closure Plan
under regulation 68.
7. A Contractor shall be obliged, where applicable, to adjust the quantum of the
Environmental Performance Guarantee within 30 days of a review date [or where there
has been a fundamental change in the financial capability of a contractor to fulfil the
requirements of these regulations] and to execute and lodge with the Authority a variation
in the existing or new Environmental Performance Guarantee.
8. Where a Contractor fails to satisfy the conditions of discharge or repayment of an
Environmental Performance Guarantee, the Council may determine that either whole or
part of the Environmental Performance Guarantee is forfeited to the Environmental
Liability Trust Fund.
9. Where the Authority or Contractor cannot agree on the quantum of the Environmental
Performance Guarantee within a reasonable period, either party may apply for an
administrative review under regulation 57 of the Exploitation Regulations,
10. The Environmental Performance Guarantee shall be released by the Authority on the
expiration of [5] years after the expiry or termination of the Exploitation Contract provided
that a Contractor has fulfilled the obligations in the final Closure Plan. To this end, the
Authority may request a report from an Appropriately Qualified Expert that the obligations
in the final Closure Plan have been satisfactorily fulfilled.
11. Where an Environmental Performance Guarantee is required by the Council under this
regulation, a Contractor may not commence any mining activities unless it has provided
for an Environmental Performance Guarantee in a form acceptable to the Authority and
any conditions which guarantees the availability of sufficient funds for the due fulfilment
of its obligation under the Exploitation Contract.
12. The provision of an Environmental Performance Guarantee by a Contractor does not limit
the responsibility and liability of a Contractor according to the Rules of the Authority.
Section 6: Commission’s recommendations to the Council on its evaluation of
the Environmental Plans and conditions
Draft Regulation 45
Factors to be considered by the Commission
1. The Commission, in accordance with the Authority’s evaluation criteria, and having taken
due account of the matters to be taken into account under regulation 41, shall consider
whether the Applicant: -
(a) has undertaken an Environmental Impact Assessment in accordance with these
Regulations and the Authority’s guidelines and Good Industry Practice, based on
56

[Page 57]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
an adequate Environmental Baseline Study and internationally recognized risk
assessment methodologies.
(b) has demonstrated that the planned mining activities will not cause foreseeable
Serious Harm to Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems and that plans are in place to
deal with any Unforeseen Serious Harm.
(c) has or will have access to and prior to the commencement of mining activities,
the necessary technology, management practices and procedures to provide for
the effective protection of the Marine Environment, including evidence of Best
Available Technologies.
(d) has adequately described areas of scientific uncertainty in connection with the
Environmental Impacts and that plans are in place to acquire further data within
reasonable technical and financial constraints
(e) has provided evidence that the precautionary approach has been, and will
continue to be, integrated into the Applicant’s risk assessment and management
processes and determination of Protective Measures.
(f) has the necessary access to insurance products that are appropriate to the
financing of exposure to environmental risk.
(g) has the financial capacity and technical capability: -
i. to Monitor key environmental indicators and ecosystem
components so as to identify, assess, manage and Mitigate the
Environmental Impacts of mining activities, particularly in the
event that environmental Monitoring and protocols indicate that
Unforeseen Serious Harm on the Marine Environment are
developing or there is a risk of such effects developing.
ii. to respond effectively to Incidents, particularly those that might
cause Serious Harm to the Marine Environment, including
compliance with Emergency Orders.
2. The Commission shall apply the guiding principles under Part II Section 2 in the conduct
of its Evaluation under this regulation.
Draft Regulation 46
Commission may obtain further advice
1. Following the consideration of the matters under regulation 45 above, and prior to the
preparation of an Evaluation Report to the Council, the Commission, in accordance with
its Rules of Procedure and in discussion with the Applicant, may, on any matter under the
Commission’s consideration: -
(a) seek the views or opinions of Appropriately Qualified Experts; and / or
(b) seek the views of any persons directly affected by the proposed Plan of Work; and /
or
(c) convene a further open meeting with Interested Persons to facilitate a further
exchange of views and opinions on specific matters; and / or
(d) commission an independent review by a panel of Appropriately Qualified Experts.
2. Where, in the Commission’s reasonable opinion, there is a material difference of opinion
concerning:
(a) the basis for, or validity of scientific information, including its degree of certainty
relating to an Environmental Impact; and / or
(b) the basis for, and effectiveness of any proposed management and Mitigation
measures and responses; and / or
57

[Page 58]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(c) the application of and criteria for an Adaptive Management approach,
and such difference of opinion relates to an environmental component of an Application
that is of key significance to the outcome of the Commission’s Evaluation, the
Commission shall refer the matter for an independent review under paragraph 1(d) above.
The Commission shall be obliged to take into account the findings of the independent
review in its Evaluation of the Plan of Work.
Draft Regulation 47
Evaluation Report to the Council
1. The Commission, in the case of each recommendation on Plan of Work made to the
Council in accordance with regulation 11 of the Exploitation Regulations, shall prepare
and include an Evaluation Report56 for the Council based on the Commission’s
Evaluation of the Environmental Plans containing, inter alia:
a) a statement on its opinion as to the adequacy of the Environmental Plans and the
main reasons for its recommendations and conclusions.
b) an outline of the matters and information that the Commission took into consideration
in evaluating the plans.
c) details of the Consultation processes undertaken by and between the Applicant,
sponsoring States and the Commission with Interested Persons, including the dates
and times of the open meetings held by the Commission and the results of such
Consultations with a summary of the issues raised.
d) details of the alternatives considered by the Applicant and the Commission’s
response.
e) the main Environmental Impacts of the proposed Plan of Work, including an
assessment of Cumulative Impacts.
f) any adverse Environmental Impacts that cannot be avoided should the Plan of Work
be implemented.
g) a description of the measures that will be taken by the Applicant to Mitigate the
principal adverse effects of the mining activities and an assessment as to whether all
practicable measures to Mitigate harm to the Marine Environment have been
considered, within reasonable technical and economic constraints.
h) an outline of the Monitoring that will be conducted by the Applicant.
i) a description of the main areas of uncertainty and consequential environmental risk
in the Plan of Work relating to scientific uncertainty, knowledge and information gaps.
j) details of any further studies, research and reporting proposed by the Applicant in
consultation with the Commission to reduce the uncertainties and environmental risk
under (i) above.
k) a summary of the opinions or findings of Appropriately Qualified Experts or panel of
such experts engaged by the Authority or the Commission.
l) a statement on how the Precautionary Approach has been applied by the Applicant
in the preparation of its Plan of Work and by the Commission in its Evaluation of the
Plan of Work, including the rationale for, and any precautionary measures proposed
as a result of, its application.
m) details of the Commission’s recommendations on the modification(s) or
amendment(s) to the Environmental Plans.
56 Under Article 165(2)(b) of the Convention, the Commission is obliged to “base its recommendations
solely on the grounds stated in Annex III and shall report fully thereon to the Council”.
58

[Page 59]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
2. The Authority shall forward a copy of the Commission’s Evaluation Report to the
Applicant.
3. The Applicant may, within 30 days request the Commission to annex any comments
relating to the Commission’s Evaluation Report, including comments relevant to: -
(a) any errors.
(b) the technical and economic feasibility of any modifications or amendments
recommended by the Commission.
(c) the results of any further research or findings by the Applicant; and
(d) any other relevant information the Applicant considers relevant to the report.
4. The Authority shall make the Evaluation Report, together with any comments made by an
Applicant under paragraph 3 above, publicly available on its website.
For consideration: as part of the responses to the Authority’s stakeholder survey in 2014,
one stakeholder suggested the use of the US EPA’s rating criteria for rating the impact of
an action and the adequacy of an EIS.57 These provide high level but easily understood
evaluation criteria for non-technical readers. These could be of relevance to the Authority.
An example of the criteria wording is as follows:
Rating the Environmental Impact of the Action
 LO (Lack of Objections): The review has not identified any potential [marine] environmental impacts
requiring substantive changes to the preferred alternative. The review may have disclosed opportunities for
application of mitigation measures that could be accomplished with no more than minor changes to the
proposed action.
 EC (Environmental Concerns): The review has identified [marine] environmental impacts that should
be avoided in order to fully protect the environment. Corrective measures may require changes to the
preferred alternative or application of mitigation measures that can reduce the environmental impact.
 EO (Environmental Objections): The review has identified significant [marine] environmental impacts
that should be avoided in order to adequately protect the environment. Corrective measures may require
substantial changes to the preferred alternative or consideration of some other project alternative (including
the no action alternative or a new alternative).
 EU (Environmentally Unsatisfactory): The review has identified adverse environmental impacts that
are of sufficient magnitude that EPA believes the proposed action must not proceed as proposed. The basis
for an environmentally unsatisfactory determination consists of identification of environmentally
objectionable impacts as defined above and one or more of the following conditions: [ ].
Rating the adequacy of the EIS
 (Adequate)
 (Insufficient Information)
 (Inadequate)
57 See https://www.epa.gov/nepa/environmental-impact-statement-rating-system-criteria.
59

[Page 60]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part VIII – Modification and Periodic Review of the
Environmental Plans [EMMP / Closure Plan]
Commentary: an assessment must be made as to what the triggers are / is for changes to
EMMPs and Closure Plans i.e. Material Changes, once the original (or revised) plans have
been approved. Guidelines should be produced and a process developed. Ideally, the
change should be assessed against relevant criteria, including the significance of the
proposed change and any consultations held. The drafting of this Part VIII presents a
starting point for discussion.
What process and procedure needs to be adopted for any “material changes” to a Plan of
Work that impacts the environmental plans?
Equally, what of the original EIA as the basis for the EMMP / Closure Plans? An EIA
process is iterative.
Draft Regulation 48
Modification of the Environmental Plans
1. A Contractor shall not modify the Environmental Plans forming part of a Plan of Work,
except in accordance with regulation 18 of the Exploitation Regulations and this Part VIII.
2. The Authority may, in consultation with a Contractor, vary or amend the Environmental
Plans where there is a Material Change relating to, arising from or as a consequence of:
(a) a proposed change in the scale or intensity of mining activities.
(b) Environmental Incidents.
(c) a required improvement in Environmental Performance.
(d) Environmental audits; and
(e) the impact of mining activities on the Marine Environment as the direct result of
increased scientific knowledge, information or experience, including that arising from
the testing of collecting systems prior to the commencement of commercial mining
activities.
Draft Regulation 49
Substantive review of Environmental Performance
1. The Authority and the Contractor shall undertake a review of activities under a Plan of
Work in accordance with regulation 19 of the Exploitation Regulations and paragraph 2
below.
2. Within 6 months of the start of the 2nd, 5th and 10th years following the date of
commencement of mining activities under an Exploitation Contract, or at such other times
and intervals agreed with the Commission at the time of the Application, the Contractor
shall submit a substantive review of its Environmental Performance in accordance with
the Authority’s guideline document. The review report shall contain the following
minimum information:
a) an assessment of Environmental Performance against the environmental
objectives and Environmental Targets.
b) the spatial extent of the Direct and Indirect Impacts associated with the
Exploitation Activities to date.
c) the efficiency and effectiveness of the amendments (conditions) imposed on
Exploitation Activities, together with an assessment of any variation to such
60

[Page 61]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
amendments as may be necessary to ensure the effective protection of the
Marine Environment.
d) any recommendations as to variations in Monitoring and / or Mitigation measures
to ensure that effective environmental Monitoring and Mitigation Measures are
maintained under the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan.
e) details of any significant or unacceptable changes to the Marine Environment
that have occurred or are likely to occur and that were not predicted originally in
the Environmental Impact Statement, including likely Cumulative Impacts.
f) details of any Incidents.
g) where applicable, details of Adaptive Management measures taken in the light of
new knowledge, information and experience.
h) details of any Consultation held with Interested Persons and other users of the
Marine Environment.
i) details of any new scientific information or knowledge and investigations
undertaken or studies made.
j) details of any environmental audits conducted in the prior period.
k) [other].
3. The Authority shall make publicly available the findings and recommendations resulting
from a review of Environment Performance, including any proposed modification(s) to the
Plan of Work, which, to the extent such modification(s) is a Material Change to a Plan of
Work, shall be approved in accordance with regulation 18 of the Exploitation Regulations.
61

[Page 62]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part IX – Environmental Management and Monitoring
Commentary: This Part X is very tentative and requires a detailed discussion / more
thought as to specifics. Equally, some of these provisions will more appropriately be
reflected as part of the terms of the standard exploitation contract (or both). As identified
by the Article 154 Review, recommendation no. 3: Future contracts should be prescriptive
with standard terms and conditions and detailed plans of work that set clear objectives,
which can be monitored and enforced. Annex VI also contains suggested clauses for the
standard contract (again, tentative). While general adherence to the operational plans
(EMMP, Closure Plan, Emergency Response and Procedures Plan) will be required (see
Section 2.2 Standard Clauses for Exploitation Contract), what specifics (objectives,
targets, thresholds etc.) will need to be prescribed for at the application stage is
fundamental.
Section 1: Adaptive Management Approach
Commentary: the application of an adaptive management approach was discussed at the
Gold Coast workshop in May 2016 but no definitive conclusions as to its suitability and / or
content reached.58 AM requires a dedicated working group to explore the issues connected
with its implementation. It would appear, as one generally accepted implementation of the
precautionary approach and sound, good environmental management, that AM should be
applied in a deep sea mining context. AM is one tool in combination with other
environmental management responsibilities and practices anticipated under these
regulations. A number of questions arise:
 When will AM will be applied (active) – what are the criteria?
 What will trigger an adaptive management response (exceeding an environmental
threshold? Unexpected adverse impacts?)
 What level of information is needed to apply such an approach?
 What is its potential impact on the approval process?
 What is its potential impact on commercial mining operations?
 What is its likelihood of success in mitigating environmental impacts?
 What are the timeframes for an adaptive management response?
 What is the reporting / approval process for AM responses?
 What are the implications for the Authority / other contractors?
Once this approach has been fully discussed (including that in connection with the
Authority’s role), appropriate regulation(s), principles and criteria for the application of AM
and related guidance can be drafted.
58 See New Zealand Government, New Zealand’s experiences with adaptive management for seabed
mining projects: A submission to the International Seabed Authority to support the development of a
regulatory framework for the exploitation of seabed minerals, January 2016. See also Canadian
Environmental Assessment Agency, Operational Policy Statement, Adaptive Management Measures
under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 2009.
62

[Page 63]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Section 2: Protection of the Marine Environment from Harmful Activities -
Obligations on the Contractor
Draft Regulation 50
General
1. A Contractor must not undertake an activity in the Area that Pollutes, or might Pollute the
Marine Environment unless the Contractor takes all reasonable and practicable
measures to prevent or minimize any resulting harm to the Marine Environment.
2. A Contractor shall undertake activities in the Area in accordance with the Rules of the
Authority and shall take all reasonable and practicable measures to prevent or minimise
any harm to the Marine Environment having due regard to:
(a) the nature of the activity and the sensitivity of the receiving Marine Environment.
(b) the current state of technical knowledge and the likelihood of success of the
measures that could be taken.
(c) the economic implications of the measures that could be taken; and
(d) Good Industry Practice.
3. The Authority, Contractors and Sponsoring States shall promote continuous
advancements in standards, protocols and guidance in the light of new knowledge,
information and experience, to ensure continuous improvement in marine Protection
Measures.
Draft Regulation 51
Adherence to Contract – Compliance with Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan and Closure Plan
1. A Contractor shall during the course of its Exploitation Activities consider, investigate,
assess and communicate the effects of its Exploitation Activities on the Marine
Environment and shall manage all such effects in accordance with the Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan approved under these Regulations
and with due regard to Good Industry Practice.
2. The Mitigation measures contained in the Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan shall be implemented at the correct time, in the correct way and at the correct place.
3. The Authority may require, at any time and with reasonable notice to a Contractor,
require a Contractor to provide a certificate of compliance, certified by an Appropriately
Qualified Expert approved by the Authority in respect of the following information:
a. the extent to which the conditions of the approval of the Environmental Plans
have or have not been complied with;
b. the details of any failure to comply with the conditions and the reasons for any
such failure.
c. any action taken, or to be taken, that will prevent the recurrence of such failure, if
any.
4. A Contractor shall maintain the currency and adequacy of the Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan during the term of the Exploitation
Contract by reference to Best Environmental Practices.
63

[Page 64]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Draft Regulation
Environmental Monitoring 52
Commentary: specific monitoring and reporting guidelines (including relevant technical
standards, monitoring areas and stations (incl. IRZs / PRZs) are required. E.g. OSPAR
Guidelines for Monitoring the Environmental Impact of Offshore Oil and Gas Activities.
1. A Contractor shall implement and carry out Monitoring in accordance with the
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and any conditions specified in such
plan or Exploitation Contract.
2. A Contractor shall, on the commencement of mining activities, ensure that it has in place
the necessary procedures to ensure that all Monitoring data is routinely reviewed and
assessed.
3. A Contractor shall ensure that the reporting requirements of the Exploitation Contract are
complied with including the provision of all Monitoring reports to the Authority within the
specified period.
Draft Regulation
Performance Assessment 53
The Authority will require regular performance assessment, and reporting on a Contractor’s
Exploitation Activities and their associated Environmental Effects in accordance with the
Rules of the Authority and to verify progress against the Plan of Work. The Authority will set
out the required content and format of such reporting, including the provision of a template to
achieve consistency in reporting format. All Information provided in respect of such reports
shall be treated as Environmental Information and shall be made publicly available order to
promote accountability and demonstrate transparency to mankind.
Draft Regulation 54
Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems
Commentary: the wording in this regulation is taken directly from regulation 31(4) of the
PN Exploration Regulations. Such procedures as anticipated by this regulation have yet to
be formulated including the criteria / characteristics for defining Vulnerable Marine
Ecosystems.
The Commission shall develop and implement procedures for determining, on the basis of
the Best Available Scientific Evidence and technical information, whether proposed
Exploitation Activities in the Area would have serious harmful effects on Vulnerable Marine
Ecosystems and ensure that, if it is determined that certain proposed Exploitation Activities
would have serious harmful effects on Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems, those activities are
managed to prevent such effects or not authorized to proceed.
Draft Regulation
Environmental Auditing 55
1. The Commission may recommend as a condition of approval of the Environmental Plans
that a Contractor procure, at intervals to be specified, an environmental audit and
compliance programme, being a comprehensive evaluation of the Environmental
64

[Page 65]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Performance and compliance of a Contractor, conducted by an Appropriately Qualified
Expert. Such evaluation shall include an evaluation of the management practices,
production processes, technical systems adopted or used by a Contractor. OR
2. The Contractor shall within a period of [90] days after [2] years from the date of this
Contract and each subsequent [2] year period, deliver to the Authority, an environmental
audit and assessment conducted by an Appropriately Qualified Expert for the purposes of
determining the Contractor’s compliance with the Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan and the state of its Environmental Management System. If any such
audit and assessment identifies any failure to comply with the requirements of the
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan, the Contractor shall be obliged to
remedy the situation at its own expense and within the timescale agreed between it and
the Authority. The Authority may stipulate additional conditions that in its reasonable
opinion are necessary in the circumstances to secure deliver of the approved
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan.
Draft Regulation 56
Pollution Control and Management of Waste
1. A Contractor shall, in accordance with the Rules of the Authority and other relevant rules
of international law, prevent, minimize and control Pollution and the production of waste
in accordance with [the Rules of the Authority].
2. All and any Mining Discharges shall be discharged of in accordance with the
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan.
What other specific obligations, if any, are required here – over and above adherence to and
compliance with an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan? E.g. Air quality, noise,
vibration management and control? Management of Benthic and Surface Plumes?
Draft Regulation 57
Vessel (installation) and equipment positioning
1. All vessels (and installations) shall be fitted with an electronic monitoring system. Such
system shall record the date, time and position of all mining activities.
2. The Authority [or Sponsoring State] shall issue a compliance notice to a Contractor under
regulation 55 of the Exploitation Regulations, where it reasonably suspects from the data
transmitted to it by such system that unapproved mining activities are occurring.
Section 3: Environmental Incidents: contingency plans and emergencies
Commentary
See Section 24 of Standard Contract Terms and definition of “Incident” means a situation
where activities in the Area result in….2. serious harm to the Marine Environment or to
other existing legitimate sea uses, whether accidental or not, or a situation in which such
serious harm to the Marine Environment is a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the
situation.
Other than the Authority, it is considered that sponsoring States and flag States will have
specific duties and responsibilities here. Those States will also have to ensure that
measures put in place to limit the consequences of any hazards and where such measures
are insufficient, operations should not be allowed to commence by the Authority.
65

[Page 66]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Draft Regulation 58
Duty on Contractor to keep an Environmental Incidents Register
1. A Contractor shall keep and maintain an Environmental Incidents Register associated
with Exploitation Activities in the Contract Area. Such register shall be maintained on the
mining vessel and transmitted to the Authority within 5 working days of any request in
writing by a duly authorized official of the Authority.
2. A Contractor shall record the following information in such register:
a. the date, time and duration of the Incident and / or when the Incident was
identified.
b. the severity of the Incident [according to a particular scale].
c. the location of the mining vessel and mining equipment and the nature of
mining activities taking place, at the time that the incident occurred.
d. the cause or likely cause of the Incident and any factors, such as weather
conditions, natural conditions that may have influenced its severity.
e. the nature and timing of any measures implemented by the Contractor to
remedy or mitigate any adverse effects, if any, associated with the Incident.
f. the steps to be taken in future to prevent the recurrence of similar Incidents;
and
g. any other relevant information.
Draft Regulation 59
Risk of Incidents
The wording below is derived from the preamble to the EU directive on the safety of
offshore oil and gas operations.59 It may have some merit. The MIDAS project has looked
into this issue of “as low as reasonably practicable”. But its context needs consideration.
ALRP seems more often applied to a health and safety context, than the environment. It is
also subjective. It may be appropriate to formulate as an environmental policy objective?
A Contractor shall reduce the risk of Incidents as low as reasonably practicable to the point
where the cost of further risk reduction would be grossly disproportionate to the benefits of
such reduction. The reasonable practicability of risk reduction measures should be kept
under review in the light of new knowledge and technology developments. In assessing
whether the time, cost and effort would be grossly disproportionate to the benefits of further
reducing the risk, regard should be had to best practice risk levels compatible with the
operations being conducted.
Draft Regulation 60
Emergency Response and Contingency Plans (to be harmonized with the Exploitation
regulations).
1. Contractors shall maintain the currency and adequacy of their Emergency Response and
Contingency Plan(s) that are site-specific, based on the on the identification of potential
Incidents and in accordance with Good Industry Practice.
59 Directive 2013/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on safety of
offshore oil and gas operations and amending Directive 2004/35/EC.
66

[Page 67]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
2. Contractors shall maintain such resources60 and procedures as are necessary for the
prompt execution and implementation of the Emergency Response and Contingency
Plans and any Emergency Orders issued by the Authority.
3. Contractors shall proactively manage their activities, including, where necessary, the
ability to suspend mining operations without any intervention by the Authority.
4. Contractors shall ensure that the plan to prevent Incidents is appropriately monitored and,
as the case may be, revised throughout the conduct of activities in the Area so as to
ensure a high level of protection to the Marine Environment at all times. [Reports and
independent verification process? + reporting to other persons with jurisdictional
competence for the relevant activity that may give rise to an Incident].
5. Contractors, the Authority and Sponsoring States shall consult in relation to the exchange
of knowledge, information and experience relating to Incidents or potential Incidents and
to use such knowledge and information to prepare and revise standards and operating
guidelines to control hazards throughout the mining life cycle.
6. Where the Authority becomes aware and in the light of new knowledge, information and
experience, that plans are inadequate or insufficient to protect the Marine Environment,
the Authority shall consult with a contractor or contractors with a view to the revision of
such plans, having due regard to the technical and economic constraints of any proposed
changes to the plans (proportionate measures). [This wording may be more useful in a
general context rather than specific to the ERCP].
7. The Authority shall [in accordance with the Seabed Mining Directorate Regulations]
develop annuals plans for the effective oversight, including inspection, of the major
hazards and the effectiveness of the Emergency Procedures and Contingency Plan.
8. The Authority shall promote and facilitate in the development and implementation of
regional emergency response and contingency plans and shall co-operate with and draw
on the advice of other relevant international organizations and with Member States who
are Coastal States accordingly.
Section 4: Other
Draft Regulation 61
Unforeseen Serious Harm
[What protocols if any should be established here? Or dealt with as part of the Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan / Emergency Response and Contingency Plan?].
Draft Regulation 62
Complaints
1. A Contractor shall record any complaints received in connection with its activities in the
Area in the Environmental Incident Register required under regulation 58.
2. Where such complaint relates to or is associated with a Contractor’s non-compliance
under the Rules of the Authority, the Contractor shall advise the Authority promptly, and
no later than 5 working days after the receipt of any complaint, and shall provide detail of
any investigation undertaken by the Contractor or other persons into such complaint,
including the measures taken to remedy such non-compliance. The Authority may
request such information as is reasonably required to determine any case of non-
60 What emergency response resources and equipment should there be in place?
67

[Page 68]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
compliance by a Contractor or direct that further investigation be undertaken by the
Contractor within a period to be agreed between the Authority and the Contractor.
Draft Regulation 63
Training
A Contractor shall provide such information, instruction, training and supervision as is
necessary to ensure that its employees, sub-contractors and agents and any other persons
engaged under its supervision, understand and are to comply with the Rules of the Authority
in accordance with the undertakings set out in the Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan.
Draft Regulation 64
Notifiable Events under an Exploitation Contract
[Notification obligations and procedures: Threshold & operational triggers (Notifiable
events) [Section 25 of the standard contract provides for Notifiable Events. These
need to be identified for the purposes of environmental matters and reflected in
Section 25].
68

[Page 69]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part X - Social and cultural management
Commentary: little attention or focus has been given to specific social and cultural
considerations in the Area aside from technical assistance / capacity building and
contribution to marine scientific research in the Area.
What other social and cultural management considerations are relevant and should be
discussed / considered?
 Human remains and objects and sites of an archaeological or historical
nature (see Section 20 of standard exploitation contract).
 Other social / cultural management aspects? Specific obligations relating
to technical assistance or MSR (e.g. in APEIs)?
[To be considered / completed as appropriate].
69

[Page 70]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part XI - Closure plans and post-closure monitoring
Commentary: at the point of termination / expiry of an Exploitation Contract, a number of
provisions / obligations will continue in full force and effect, including on-going liability, post
closure monitoring etc.
In connection with the execution and delivery of the obligations arising under a Closure
Plan, specifically those relating to post closure management and monitoring, is which
person(s) will undertake these activities? Will a contractor continue to directly supervise
the delivery of a closure plan or will this responsibility be transferred to a third party? If the
latter is the case, should the Authority impose a prior approval mechanism for this?61
Draft Regulation 65
Suspension of / cessation of activities / care and maintenance (temporary suspension)
1. A Contractor shall, within [6] months of an expected cessation or anticipated temporary
suspension of activities, or as soon as is reasonably practicable in the case of any
unexpected cessation or suspension, submit for the approval of the Authority, a final
Closure Plan which shall detail the post closure monitoring programme in accordance
with the Authority’s guideline document and relevant Strategic Environmental
Management Plan.
2. The Authority shall review the final Closure Plan within 30 days of its receipt and shall:
(a) approve the final Closure Plan in writing;
(b) request further information from the Contractor; and /or
(c) suggest amendments to the final Closure Plan in the light of new knowledge,
information or experience available to the Authority and based on Good Industry
Practice; and
(d) review the quantum of any Environmental Performance Guarantee provided
according to regulation 44.
Draft Regulation 66
Post-closure Monitoring and management
1. Upon cessation or temporary suspension of mining activities, a Contractor shall
implement the final Closure Plan in accordance with the conditions of its implementation,
including the required management and Monitoring of the areas defined by the plan
[Mining Area / Preservation Reference Zone(s) / Impact Reference Zone(s) /
Environmental Impact Area] and the delivery to the Authority of Monitoring reports,
surveys and results, assessments and recommendations as agreed in the final Closure
Plan.
2. The post-closure management and Monitoring obligations shall take place for a period
after the cessation of mining activities, the length of which shall be agreed in the final
61 This question is posed as the South African Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development
Regulation (23 April 2004) anticipate and stipulate the transfer of environmental liabilities to a
competent person (including the responsibilities under an environmental management plan) and the
requirements for such application to transfer respectively, including the qualifications of that competent
person (see MPRD regulations 58 and 59). Is this something of relevance (potential) to activities in the
Area?
70

[Page 71]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Closure Plan [and / or, where applicable, according to the post-closure completion criteria
listed in the final Closure Plan].
3. The Authority, in co-operation with the Sponsoring State, shall ensure that the final
Closure Plan is implemented in accordance with its terms. [Note: it would be usual, in
land-based regimes for an inspection of a mining area to occur to ensure obligations
have been fulfilled in regard to a Closure Plan. That is not practicable in a deep sea
context. Aside from the submission of monitoring surveys and perhaps remote monitoring
/ surveillance technology, what other means are or should be available to the Authority /
sponsoring State to ensure implementation and completion?].
71

[Page 72]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part XII – Compensatory measures
Commentary: “compensatory measures” are aimed at providing environmental
compensation for those areas of environmental impacts that cannot be avoided, remedied or
mitigated or in the case of the Environmental Liability Trust Fund, to plug a potential
environmental liability gap.
Section 1: Environmental Liability Trust Fund
Commentary: the concept of such a fund was mooted by the SDC Advisory Opinion
to cover any environmental liability gap. The rationale for such a fund, its objectives
and funding options will be a matter for further discussion (Legal Working Group on
Responsibility and Liability and Payment Regime Workshop #3). Consequently, the
wording below is provisional and discussion will benefit from precedents in other
sectors(e.g. O&G) and the overall financial package under assessment.
Draft Regulation 67
Set-up of Environmental Liability Trust Fund
1. The Authority hereby establishes the Environmental Liability Trust Fund.
2. The rules and procedures of the fund will be established by the Finance Committee and
subject to the approval of the Council.
3. The Authority shall, within 90 days of the end of a calendar year, prepare an audited
statement of the income and expenditure of the Fund for distribution to the Members of
the Authority.
Draft Regulation 68
Purpose of the Fund
The main purposes of the fund will be and in respect of which the Fund may be applied are:
(a) the implementation of any necessary measures designed to prevent, limit or
remediate any damage to the Area arising from activities in the Area, the costs of
which cannot be recovered from a Contractor or sponsoring State, as the case may
be.
(b) the promotion of research into methods of marine mining engineering and practice by
which environmental damage or impairment resulting from exploitation activities in
the Area may be reduced.
(c) for the purposes of education and training programmes in relation to the protection of
the Marine Environment.
(d) the funding of research into Best Available Techniques for restoration and
rehabilitation of the Area.
(e) the restoration and rehabilitation of the Area when technically and economically
feasible.
(f) the holding of any Environmental Performance Guarantee in trust.
(g) [Other]
72

[Page 73]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Draft Regulation 69
Funding
The fund will consist of the following money:
(a) the prescribed [percentage / amount] of fees paid under the Rules of the Authority;
(b) the prescribed percentage of any penalties paid under the Rules of the Authority;
(c) the prescribed percentage of any amounts recovered by the Authority by negotiation
or as a result of legal proceedings in respect of a contravention of the Rules of the
Authority;
(d) any money paid into the Fund at the direction of the Council, based on
recommendations of the Finance Committee;
(e) any income received by the Fund from the investment of money belonging to the
Fund;
(f) [any money paid required to be paid into the Fund by way of any Financial
Guarantee or Security provided under the Rules of the Authority].
Commentary: Seabed Mining Sustainability Fund. The draft legal framework issued by the
Commission in March 2015 (and based on submissions to the Stakeholder Survey
conducted by the Authority in 2014) proposed the concept of such a fund. The idea
received general support. However, an action proposed at that time was to draft a working
paper articulating the concept and objectives of such a fund and possible funding
mechanisms. This has not yet been actioned however the fund is / will be considered as a
part of the payment regime discussion.
Equally, one aspect that needs to be considered is the potential overlap between this fund
and the Environmental Liability Trust Fund (and equally the existing Endowment and
Voluntary trust funds). Though the rationale for their set-up is different, there may be some
overlap in terms of the use of the fund monies. As regards running and administrative
expenses, establishing one fund is preferable.
The following regulatory wording has been drafted in connection with this fund, but it has
not been reflected as a “formal” regulation until the full merits of such a fund have been
discussed and a policy decision made.
Seabed Mining Sustainability Fund
Set-up of Seabed Mining Sustainability Fund
1. The Authority hereby establishes the Seabed Sustainability Fund (hereinafter ‘the
fund’), to be funded by the seabed sustainability fund levy in accordance with
regulation [ ] of the Exploitation Regulations.
2. The rules and procedures of the fund will be established by the Finance Committee
and subject to the approval of the Council.
Objectives of the fund
1. The main objectives of the fund are: -
(a) to facilitate research into, and comprehensive studies of, marine ecosystems in the
deep-sea and to improve the evidence base of the nature, distribution and
sensitivity of marine environmental resources relevant to exploitation activities;
73

[Page 74]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(b) to increase the understanding of the effects, including cumulative impacts, of
activities in the Area on the marine environment, including the physical loss of
habitat, the physical alteration of the seabed, noise and their significance;
(c) the efficient and safe extraction of the resources and appropriate mitigation,
monitoring and management programmes;
(d) the management and monitoring of areas of particular environmental interest and
other marine spatial planning tools;
(e) to research and understand socio-economic issues associated with activities in the
Area;
(f) to promote co-ordination and establishment of sustainable archives for the
dissemination of research related to these aims to a wide range of interested
parties;
(g) the development of technologies associated with the above;
(h) the provision of scientific and technical assistance to developing States in
accordance with Article 202 of the Convention.
(i) to research into the technical and economic feasibility of restoration and
rehabilitation techniques.
2. The Authority shall promote the institutional capacities of developing States, in
connection with programmes established by the fund, in particular least developed,
land-locked and small island developing States.
3. The Authority shall, where practicable, co-operate with other international
organizations or groups with similar funds and objectives in order that a collaborative
and cost-effective approach may be obtained in delivering mutual objectives.
4. The fund shall be held in trust in accordance with the Authority’s rules and procedures.
5. The fund shall be independently audited annually by an internationally recognized
accounting and auditing practice.
6. An annual report detailing the activities undertaken by the fund and against the
objectives of the fund, together with audited financial statements of the amounts
received and amounts disbursed, shall be published each year.
7. The Council will undertake a strategic review, including a financial review, of the fund
every 5 years. Where in the Council’s reasonable opinion, based on recommendations
of the Finance Committee and any interested parties, the fund has sufficient financial
reserves to meet its immediate and foreseeable objectives, the Council may order a
temporary suspension in the payment of the seabed sustainability fund levy.
Section 2: Other compensatory measures
Draft Regulation 70
Residual [significant] adverse change
 [Offsets]
[To be considered / discussed].
74

[Page 75]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part XIII - Data and information management
Section 1: Obligations on Authority
Section 2: Obligations on Contractor
 Handling & archiving of biological samples
[To be completed (or presented as a standard contract clause) in the light of
the Authority’s data management strategy together with any specific
guidelines or recommendations relating to samples that are considered
appropriate. Section 22 of the standard clauses for Exploitation Contract
makes reference to “samples” but is a relatively basic provision].
75

[Page 76]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part XIV – Compliance, Supervision, Enforcement [and Penalties]
Commentary: under Article 153(4) of the Convention, the Authority is obliged to “exercise
such control….as is necessary” in order to secure compliance with the rules of the
Authority. Equally, States Parties are also obliged to assist the Authority by taking “all
necessary measures” as part of its responsibility to ensure compliance.
Article 153(4) provides the Authority the right “to take at any time any measures” under
Part XI and the right to inspect all installations.
Again, there are issues of jurisdictional competence and overlap here and a matrix setting
out duties and responsibilities is required.
Under Article 165(2) there are a number of obligations placed on the Commission as
regards programmes, supervision and inspection:
 (c) supervise (on the Council’s request) activities in consultation / collaboration
with a contractor “or States or States concerned” (sponsoring States?).
 (h) recommendations to the Council as regards monitoring programmes and co-
ordinate the implementation of such programmes. Note: this is specifically in
relation to “the risks or effects of pollution of the marine environment resulting from
activities in the Area” (see also Article 209).
 (k) recommendations to issue emergency orders (including suspension or
adjustment of operations) to prevent serious harm
 (m) recommendations as regards the “direction and supervision of a staff of
inspectors”.
As to an inspection mechanism, regulation 54 of the Exploitation Regulations outlines the
basic requirements on contractors as regards inspection. However, a full inspection regime
needs to be considered in conjunction / collaboration with sponsoring States.
This Part XIV identifies certain “measures” that could be taken by the Authority. However,
the role of the Authority and that of a sponsoring State, and the necessary co-operation /
collaboration between them must be clearly mapped out in due course.
Questions:
 Under Article 165(3), “[t]he members of the Commission shall, upon request by
any State Party or other party concerned, be accompanied by a representative of
such State or other party concerned when carrying out their function of supervision
and inspection.” What does this mean / imply? Who is “other party concerned?
 In connection with “pollution” arising from seabed activities, Article 209(1) requires
international rules, regulations and procedures to be established to prevent,
reduce and control pollution for activities in the Area: by the Authority / Member
States? (See also Article 215 stating that the enforcement of these rules are to be
governed by Part XI). What is categorized as “pollution” for the purposes of
Authority / Sponsoring State jurisdiction: noise? oil leaks from mining equipment?
ore spills on transfer from a mining vessel to a transportation barge? (versus
waste categorized as Mining Discharges).
 Under Article 209(2) States are also to adopt laws and regulations relating to
pollution form activities in the Area (being no less effective than those under art.
76

[Page 77]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
209(1)) “undertaken by vessels, installations, structures and other devices flying
their flag or of their registry or operating under their authority, as the case may be”.
What are vessels, installations, structures and other devices contemplated here?
Which regulatory body has jurisdiction over what tangible feature (or part thereof)
and over category of pollution (and waste) arising from mining operations?
 Aside from the specific compliance and supervision measures prescribed by the
Convention (e.g. emergency orders, supervision, inspection of installations etc.)
how broad are the Authority’s powers in connection with other compliance
measures? What “necessary measures” should be taken by a sponsoring State?
This Part XIV outlines other potential measures / action to be taken by the
Authority. However, the legal basis for these measures needs to be considered,
together with measures that would more appropriately be taken by a sponsoring
State (as anticipated by the Convention) in its duty to assist the Authority.
Section 1: General
Draft Regulation 71
General
The [Authority] shall, in co-operation with Sponsoring States, monitor, evaluate and supervise,
including a right to inspect under regulation 54 of the Exploitation Regulations, the
Exploitation Activities under an Exploitation Contract on a continuous basis and shall develop
and implement such monitoring62 and supervision programmes, approved by the Council, to
ensure the effective protection of the Marine Environment and the prevention, reduction and
control of Pollution from such activities.
Draft Regulation 72
Power of Authority to direct Contractor to take action to prevent or minimize
Environmental Impacts
Where, in the opinion of the Authority in consultation with a Sponsoring State, a Contractor is
conducting Exploitation Activities in a way that results, or is likely to result in the breach of an
Environmental Target under the Contractor’s Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plan, the Authority may, by way of a compliance notice under regulation 55 of the
Exploitation Regulations, direct that the Contractor take such action as is necessary to
comply with the specified requirements of the notice to prevent or minimize damage to the
Marine Environment. Such notice issued may impose any reasonable requirement on a
Contractor which may include, as the circumstances dictate:
a) a requirement to cease or not commence a specified activity for a specified period or
until such time and date as the Authority and Contractor agree.
b) a requirement to undertake a specified activity in a specified way, and within a
specified period or at specified times or in specified circumstances.
c) a requirement to take necessary measures to prevent or minimize any damage to the
Marine Environment.
d) a requirement to undertake specific tests or monitoring and to furnish the Authority
with the results or report of such tests or monitoring.
62 Under Article 165(2)(h), the Commission are obliged to make recommendations to the Council as
regards monitoring programmes and co-ordinate the implementation of such programmes.
77

[Page 78]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Draft Regulation 73
Necessary measures to secure compliance
1. The Authority, in co-operation with a Sponsoring State, shall take necessary measures to
secure Contractor compliance with the Rules of the Authority where specified actions or
outcomes, identified by the reporting and Monitoring measures, on inspection by the
Authority or Sponsoring State or by verifiable information from a third-party, are assessed
as providing evidence of non-compliance, including, but not limited to:
(a) waste and pollution not being properly managed.
(b) Exploitation Activities being conducted outside the boundaries of an approved Plan
of Work.
(c) Performance Assessments or reports not being submitted.
(d) Monitoring not being done in accordance with an Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan.
(e) mining methods being used which are likely to have significant impacts on the Marine
Environment and where such methods were not assessed by an Environmental
Impact Assessment.
(f) other material and un-notified deviation from the approved Plan of Work.
(g) [other].
2. Where it appears a Contractor is not in compliance with under paragraph 1 above, the
Authority may issue a compliance notice according to regulation 55 of the Exploitation
Regulations.
Section 2: Emergency Orders
Draft Regulation 74
Emergency Orders
Commentary: the wording in the next text box has been extracted verbatim from
regulation 33 of the PN Exploration Regulations.
This entire wording needs a re-think as it is difficult to understand how the protocols and
procedures will work in practice, particularly in relation to the remoteness of the activities
(and what categories of incident the wording is attempting to address) as well as the
involvement of many different levels / organs of the Authority.
An adequate Emergency Response and Contingency Plan (ERCP) (as anticipated by
Section 6 Standard clauses for exploration contract and required as part of a Plan of Work
for exploitation (regulation 4, Exploitation Regulations) is the pre-requisite here (together
with an adequate safety and environmental management system). Section 24 of the
standard exploitation contract terms (as currently drafted) obliges a contractor to
implement the ERCP in connection with an Incident and to report to the Authority. An
ERCP should also address other reporting protocols as necessary.
Annex V of the Exploitation Regulations needs further populating as to the minimum
content and requirements of an ERCP in due consultation with other international
organisations (e.g. IMO) not least as regards human health and safety aspects (e.g.
search and rescue). (Annex III to this working draft populates some of the content of a
“typical” ERCP to be dealt with under the Exploitation Regulations).
Additionally, and following appropriate consultation noted above, the Authority will need to
78

[Page 79]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
formulate an internal emergency response plan which should be duly approved by the
Council and implemented by the yet to be established mining inspectorate.
As a consequence of an Incident, its circumstances will require investigation and whether
the Incident is contractor / site-specific or has ramifications for other third party operations.
Regulation 33 Emergency orders
1. A contractor shall promptly report to the Secretary-General in writing, using the most effective
means, any incident arising from activities which have caused, are causing or pose a threat of
serious harm to the marine environment.
2. When the Secretary-General has been notified by a contractor or otherwise becomes aware of an
incident63 resulting from or caused by a contractor’s activities in the Area that has caused, is causing
or poses a threat of serious harm to the marine environment, the Secretary-General shall cause a
general notification of the incident to be issued, shall notify in writing the contractor and the
sponsoring State or States, and shall report immediately to the Legal and Technical Commission, to
the Council and to all other members of the Authority. A copy of the report shall be circulated to
competent international organizations and to concerned sub-regional, regional and global
organizations and bodies. The Secretary-General shall monitor developments with respect to all
such incidents and shall report on them as appropriate to the Commission, the Council and all other
members of the Authority.
3. Pending any action by the Council, the Secretary-General shall take such immediate measures of
a temporary nature as are practical and reasonable in the circumstances to prevent, contain and
minimize serious harm or the threat of serious harm to the marine environment. Such temporary
measures shall remain in effect for no longer than 90 days, or until the Council decides at its next
regular session or a special session, what measures, if any, to take pursuant to paragraph 6 of this
regulation.
4. After having received the report of the Secretary-General, the Commission shall determine, based
on the evidence provided to it and taking into account the measures already taken by the contractor,
which measures are necessary to respond effectively to the incident in order to prevent, contain and
minimize serious harm or the threat of serious harm to the marine environment, and shall make its
recommendations to the Council.
5. The Council shall consider the recommendations of the Commission.
6. The Council, taking into account the recommendations of the Commission, the report of the
Secretary-General, any information provided by the contractor and any other relevant information,
may issue emergency orders, which may include orders for the suspension or adjustment of
operations, as may be reasonably necessary to prevent, contain and minimize serious harm or the
threat of serious harm to the marine environment arising out of activities in the Area.
7. If a contractor does not promptly comply with an emergency order to prevent, contain and
minimize serious harm or the threat of serious harm to the marine environment arising out of its
activities in the Area, the Council shall take by itself or through arrangements with others on its
behalf, such practical measures as are necessary to prevent, contain and minimize any such serious
harm or threat of serious harm to the marine environment.
8. In order to enable the Council, when necessary, to take immediately the practical measures to
prevent, contain and minimize the serious harm or threat of serious harm to the marine environment
63 Could this wording anticipate information coming to the light of the Authority as a result of a
whistleblower mechanism?
79

[Page 80]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
referred to in paragraph 7, the contractor, prior to the commencement of testing of collecting systems
and processing operations, will provide the Council with a guarantee of its financial and technical
capability to comply promptly with emergency orders or to assure that the Council can take such
emergency measures. If the contractor does not provide the Council with such a guarantee, the
sponsoring State or States shall, in response to a request by the Secretary-General and pursuant to
articles 139 and 235 of the Convention, take necessary measures to ensure that the contractor
provides such a guarantee or shall take measures to ensure that assistance is provided to the
Authority in the discharge of its responsibilities under paragraph 7.
1. A Contractor shall promptly report to the Secretary-General in writing, using the most
effective means, any Incident arising from activities which have caused, are causing or
pose a threat of Serious Harm to the Marine Environment.
2. Where an activity carried out by a Contractor poses an immediate danger to human
health or significantly increases the risk of an Incident, the Authority [and sponsoring
States] shall ensure that the Contractor takes suitable measures by issuing an
Emergency Order [including required improvements] which may include, if considered
necessary, suspending the relevant activity until the danger or risk is adequately
controlled. The Authority shall ensure that where such measures are taken, the
Contractor notifies the Authority accordingly without delay and no later than 24 hours
after taking those measures.
3. The Contractor shall comply with Emergency Orders issued by the [Council / Mining
Inspectorate] to prevent, contain or minimize Serious Harm or the threat of Serious Harm
to the Marine Environment, which may include orders to the Contractor to immediately
suspend or adjust any activities in the Mining Area.
4. If a Contractor fails to comply with the Emergency Order, the Authority, may in its
absolute discretion, take any reasonable action required by such order. The reasonable
costs and expenses incurred by the Authority taking action under this regulation may be
recovered by the Authority as a debt from the Contractor who failed to comply with the
requirements of the order and shall, where provided, be set-off against the Environmental
Performance Guarantee. Such costs and expenses shall be in addition to any monetary
penalties which may be imposed on the Contractor pursuant to the terms of the
Exploitation Contract.
Section 3: Area Environmental Protection Measure
Draft Regulation 75
Environmental Protection Measure
1. The Council may issue an Environmental Protection Measure for the purpose of securing
compliance with the general duty to protect the Marine Environment from Serious Harm.
Such Protection Measure may be issued generally and applicable to all contractors, a
number of contractors or to a specific contractor.
2. The protection measure shall: -
(a) state the purpose for which it is intended.
(b) specify the Serious Harm that it is intended to prevent or minimize.
(c) the reasons for the protection measure including new information, knowledge or
experience (e.g. through Emergency Orders).
80

[Page 81]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
(d) the date and time by which the measure shall take effect, taking account of a period
for reasonable compliance in the circumstances of the case.
(e) details of the duration of any measure issued under this regulation.
3. An Environmental Protection Measure may require a Contractor(s) to which it is issued
to:-
(a) discontinue or not commence a specified activity for the specified period.
(b) not to carry on a specified activity except as required under any special conditions of
the measure.
(c) prepare a plan of action to prevent or minimize harm to the Marine Environment or to
control Pollution or waste.
(d) conduct specific tests or environmental monitoring and reports of such tests or
monitoring be evaluated before any specified activity commences or be allowed to
continue.
4. Any Environmental Protection Measure shall remain in force for the period specified in
the written notice or until such time as the order is withdrawn in writing by the Council.
Section 4: Compliance (remediation?) Notice
Commentary: the steps to be taken in respect of a Compliance notice are contained in
draft regulation 55 of the Exploitation Regulations. There is currently no specific obligation
for a Contractor to restore or rehabilitate the marine environment (but for this to be
considered in an EMMP on the basis of (future) technical and economic feasibility).
In the light of the Netherland’s paper addressed to the Council regarding compensatory
measures, would it be prudent at this point to include some form of “remediation notice”
allowing the Authority (Council) to direct the taking of remedial (restoration) or
compensatory (offset) measures, where feasible or the payment of a sum in respect of
such remediation or compensatory measures?
This question is perhaps best tackled following any preliminary thoughts flowing from a
legal working group on responsibility and liability, payment regime workshop(s) etc.
Section 5: Power to take remedial action
Draft Regulation 76
Authority’s power to recover costs in the event of remedial measures
If a Contractor fails to comply with a compliance notice, the Authority may take such
necessary and reasonable measures to remedy any damage to the Marine Environment and
/ or to prevent any pollution of the Marine Environment pursuant to regulation 56 of the
Exploitation Regulations.
Section 6: Penalties
Commentary: Annex VIII to the Exploitation Regulations (Schedule of Contract violations
and monetary penalties should reflect / list relevant violations relating to environmental
matters. These could include:
 Failure to report (Annual and other reporting)
 Notifiable events; failure to notify
81

[Page 82]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
 Environmental Incidents
 Not achieving / exceeding Environmental Targets & thresholds
 Relating to Environmental Performance (SMART objectives / targets)
82

[Page 83]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part XV - Annual reporting obligations
Draft Regulation 77
Annual Reporting by Contractors
1. Contractors shall produce an annual report in accordance with Section 19 of Standard
Clause of Exploitation Contract in addition to any other reporting obligations under these
Regulations. For the purpose of these Regulations, such report shall include a summary
of the Mitigation measures deployed and Monitoring undertaken in the previous 12
months and the results of such measures and Monitoring and an assessment of the
Environmental Performance of the Contractor against the Environmental Objectives and
Environmental Targets, including a review of environmental Incidents. [template / format
required in due course but regulation should specific minimum requirements.
Environmental Management and Monitoring / Closure Plan should specific reporting
specifics].
2. All and any Environmental Information contained in such annual report shall be made
publicly available by the Contractor and the Authority.
[Note: the wording of this regulation may be better reflected in standard contract terms].
83

[Page 84]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Part XVI – Other administrative matters
Draft Regulation 78
Avoidance of duplication in procedures
The Authority and Sponsoring States shall co-operate toward the avoidance of unnecessary
duplication of procedures and compliance requirements under their respective rules,
regulations and procedures.
Draft Regulation 79
Information discovery order
The Council may issue an information discovery order by written notice to any person
engaged in or connected with activities in the Area in order to facilitate the administration and
enforcement of these Regulations. The Council may issue such an order under this
regulation where it reasonably suspects that the person to whom the order is issued has
knowledge of or information required by the Authority for the proper execution of its duties.
Draft Regulation 80
Public register
The Authority shall maintain a public register containing, inter alia, the following information:
(a) the recommendations made by the Commission in respect of the Environmental
Plans.
(b) the Environmental Plans considered under these Regulations, together with details of
the amendments, modifications and conditions to a Plan of Work.
(c) the result of any tests or monitoring or evaluation undertaken in compliance with the
conditions prescribed in the approved Plan of Work.
(d) the details and results of further environmental assessment work carried out in each
Contract Area.
(e) copies of each compliance notice issued by the Authority pursuant to regulation 55 of
the Exploitation Regulations in respect of environmental matters and subsequent
action and / or measures taken.
(f) the details and results of environmental audits, inspection and compliance
programmes.
Draft Regulation 81
Review and amendment of these Regulations
1. These Regulations shall be reviewed in accordance with regulation 59 of the Exploitation
Regulations.
2. The Authority shall develop and implement a process and procedure whereby a period of
Consultation will be held with Interested Persons relating to any proposed amendments
to the provisions of these Regulations.
84

[Page 85]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Annex I
Environmental Scoping Report
[Indicative only]
Contents
1. Introduction
a. Project Overview
2. Purpose of the Development
3. Viability of the Project
a. Applicants Credentials
b. Feasibility Investigations
c. Compatibility with ISA Strategies and Plans
d. Compliance with existing law, including the Rules of the Authority
4. Description of the Proposed Development
a. Location and size of Mining Area(s)
5. Development Timetable
6. Biophysical Environmental Setting and Issues
a. Marine Environment
b. Marine Setting
c. Marine Issues
i. Issues at the Surface
ii. Issues in the Water Column (Pelagic)
iii. Issues Above the Seafloor (Demersal/Midwater)
iv. Issues Associated with the Seafloor (Benthic)
d. Proposed Studies
e. Review of available scientific publications
7. Socio Economic Issues
a. Setting
b. Issues
c. Proposed Studies
8. Availability of Baseline Information and Data
9. Assessment of natural hazards
10. Levels of Certainty / Uncertainty in Data
11. Application of the Precautionary Approach
12. Assessment of Relevant Risks
13. Proposed Stakeholder Consultation, including other users of the Marine Environment
14. Site Selection / Alternatives Considered
15. Appropriately Qualified Experts
85

[Page 86]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Annex II
Format / Content of an Environmental Impact Statement
[EIS template(s) to be inserted on finalization at Berlin workshop, March
2017].
86

[Page 87]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Annex III
Format / Content of an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
[See also NIWA guidelines re specifics on monitoring categories.
Consider IFC Performance Standard 6.
Consider separate sub-plans
An Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan must include [indicative]:
A. Introduction and Background
1. Executive Summary
2. Description of project
(a) location
(b) overview of activities and assessment of impacts (physical, chemical, biological).
(c) outline of technology to be deployed.
3. Environmental Objectives: a description of the Environmental Objectives and site-specific
objectives for the plan for:
(a) the management of identified Environmental Impacts to prevent, mitigate and, where
applicable, offset the impacts on Biodiversity in the Environmental Impact Area;
(b) applicable socio-economic conditions and factors;
(c) historical and cultural aspects, where applicable.
4. Environmental policy.
5. Implementation schedule.
6. Approval and other regulatory requirements:
(a) Authority.
(b) Sponsoring State.
(c) Flag State.
(d) Other.
B. Environmental Management
7. Aims and objectives.
8. Management and key personnel:
(a) a list of key personnel and points of contact, including but not limited to personnel
with specific environmental management responsibilities under the plan.
9. Environmental Management System: details of the EMS, at company / entity and mining
project levels.
10. Relationship with Strategic Environmental Management Plan.
(a) compliance with the relevant Strategic Environmental Management Plan of the
Authority, including the designation of the Impact Reference Zones and Preservation
Reference Zones in accordance with the design criteria and guidelines issued by the
Authority [for the primary purposes of ensuring the preservation of and to facilitate the
monitoring of biological communities potentially impacted by exploitation activities. Impact
reference zones should be designated within the mining area(s) actually mined. Preservation
reference zones should be designated to include some occurrence of [mineral resource
category] in order to be as ecologically similar as possible to the impacted mining area(s), and
be spatially removed from potential mining impacts].
11. Management procedures: including, but not limited to:
(a) continued identification of potential Environmental Impacts and associated
87

[Page 88]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Environmental Risk Assessment.
(b) development of an environmental programme for the management of Environmental
Impacts.
(c) identification of roles and responsibilities, environmental and operations training
requirements (environmental awareness programme), internal and external
communication, documentation and document control.
(d) the management of and response to environmental Incidents, contingency planning,
audit and review including standard operating procedures, as they relate to potential
Environmental Impacts from: the mining vessel. mining equipment, waste
management / policy, lighting, vessel and other operational noise, equipment loss at
sea, hazardous substances management, mining operations, dealing with any
spillages including of oil and hazardous substances and procedures for generally
minimizing potential Environmental Impacts associated with mining activities.
12. Adaptive Management: requirements (process, procedure, response) for adaptive
management approach, where applicable.
13. Opportunities for the improved management and conservation of natural resources in the
mining areas.
14. Procedures to minimize greenhouse gas air emissions (as defined by the IPCC).
15. Other procedures or actions necessary to comply with all of the conditions of the
approval by the Authority and any other relevant regulatory or legislative requirements.
16. Disposal of Mining Discharges.
17. Relevant maps / co-ordinates identifying mining area(s), Environmental Impact Areas,
Impact Reference Zones and Preservation Reference Zones, protected areas etc.
18. Historical and cultural considerations and management where applicable.
19. Socio-economic considerations and management.
20. Details of Consultations proposed with Interested Persons, including: Fisheries, Shipping,
Submarine cables, Marine scientific research, Coastal States, third party contractors.
21. Cultural heritage
22. Assessment of any restoration / rehabilitation of the Marine Environment and the likely
effectiveness of such techniques based on the technical and economic feasibility.
C. Environmental Monitoring and Review
23. Aims and objectives.
24. Description of Monitoring programme, standards and protocols (e.g. BACI: Before, After,
Control, Impact, for the execution of Monitoring programmes?).
25. Technology to be deployed:
26. Monitoring frequency of respective elements / components of the Marine Environment.
27. Monitoring procedures required to implement the Monitoring programme: Monitoring
objectives, Monitoring requirements, corrective actions and control of monitoring records
(split: prior to commencement of mining activities? During mining activities?)
28. Details of the environmental monitoring stations across the Environmental Impact Area.
29. Details of the quality control and management standards (assessment methodology)
(based on Internationally Recognized Standards to support the delivery of good,
objective and comparable data and information and equivalent to [e.g. ISO-9001/9002]).
30. Monitoring specifics e.g. water quality; sedimentation rates; sound; plume extent; etc.
plus relevant Environmental Targets.
31. Monitoring of Mining Discharges.
32. Processes for Monitoring reviews and Environmental audits.
33. Further research and studies.
88

[Page 89]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
D. Environmental Reporting
34. Details of reporting requirements and timing.
35. Data sharing.
Appendices
Maps
Technical reports
Data sources
89

[Page 90]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Annex IV
Format / Content of a Closure Plan
A Closure Plan must include:
1. a description of the closure aims and objectives and how these relate to the mining
activity and its environmental and social setting.
2. a plan with co-ordinates showing the area(s) subject to the closure objectives.
3. a summary of the relevant regulatory requirements, including conditions previously
documented.
4. details of the closure implementation and timetable, including description of the
decommissioning arrangements for vessels, plant and equipment.
5. arrangements for temporary closure / suspension in mining activities (‘care and
maintenance’).
6. information relating to baseline conditions for Monitoring measures.
7. an updated Environmental Risk Assessment together with details of the identifiable
Residual Environmental Effects.
8. details of post closure Monitoring: benthic ecology and seabed sediment surveys
9. details of the management measures to Mitigate the Residual Environmental Effects.
10. details of the persons or entity that will implement the management measures under 5.
above and their qualification(s) and experience.
11. details of the quantum of the Financial Guarantee and Security provided under the
Regulations / condition of approval.
12. reporting / handling of data and information post closure.
13. details of Consultations with Interested Persons.
14. details of any progressive remediation or rehabilitation, where applicable / directed by the
Council.
15. [details of any compensatory measures agreed or proposed to achieve the agreed
closure objectives].
16. [technical documents or reports to be annexed to Closure Plan].
Note: a Closure Plan will be a dynamic document and process. As data is collected during
the life of a mining project, a Closure Plan will be updated and its objectives and
implementation requirements refined.
90

[Page 91]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Annex V
Content of an Emergency Response and Contingency Plan
The plan shall include:
1. the overall aims and objectives and arrangements for controlling the risk of Incidents.
2. relevant codes, standards and protocols.
3. organisational structure and personnel roles and responsibilities.
4. details of individuals authorized to initiate response mechanism(s)
5. details of control mechanisms in place during the course of normal operations.
6. details of the emergency response equipment.
7. details of the safety and Environmental Management System to be integrated into the
overall management system of the Contractor.
8. description of the mining operations and equipment, including emergency response
equipment.
9. description of all foreseeable Incidents and likelihood and consequences assessed and
associated control measures.
10. the number of persons that can be present on the mining vessels at any time.
11. description of the arrangements to protect persons on the mining vessel, and to ensure
their safe escape, evacuation and rescue.
12. details of arrangements for the maintenance of control systems to monitor the Marine
Environment in the event of an Incident.
13. details of the safety and Environmental Management System.
14. details of the emergency response plan.
15. details of the known natural marine environmental conditions that may influence the
efficiency of response equipment or the effectiveness of a response effort.
16. information and measures relating to the prevention of Incidents which could result in
Serious Harm to the Marine Environment.
17. assessment of Pollution hazards and the measures to prevent or reduce such hazards.
18. assessment of Mining Discharges and measures to control such discharges.
19. details of the warning mechanism to the Authority and [other] together with the type of
information to be contained in such warning.
20. details of arrangements for co-ordinating any emergency response.
21. details of training programmes for personnel.
22. description of monitoring of performance under plan.
23. details of audit and review processes.
24. [other hazards / harmful substances; oil spills, leaks etc. from normal operation of mining
vessel].
Note: this plan is to be developed further under these Regulations and the Exploitation
Regulations and in conjunction with other international organizations, sponsoring States and
other entities with relevant jurisdictional competence as regards specific components of the
plan.
91

[Page 92]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Annex VI
Standard Contract Terms: Environmental management, monitoring and
reporting
[See also comments under Part IX – Environmental Management and
Monitoring]
The following standard terms and conditions shall be incorporated into Section(s) [ ] of the
Standard Contract Terms annexed to the Exploitation Regulations:
xx. The Contractor shall at all times give effect to the Environmental Objectives of the
Authority as regards the protection of the Marine Environment and, shall:
(a) manage all aspects of the Exploitation Activities in accordance with the
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan as an
integral part of such Exploitation Activities.
(b) [other]
xx. The Contractor shall, in the case of the temporary suspension of or cessation of
mining activities, comply with the Closure Plan, and conditions attaching thereto, as required
to management, monitor and where applicable Mitigate, any Residual Environmental Effects.
xx. The Contractor shall co-operate with other contractors, entities, national and
international scientific research agencies, sponsoring States and other persons engaged in
Exploration and Exploitation Activities in the Area, with a view to, and in respect of
Environmental Impacts:
(a) sharing, exchange and assessment of Environmental Information for the
Area;
(b) co-operating in research activities designed to identify gaps in scientific
knowledge and the development of targeted and focused research
programmes to address such gaps;
(c) collaborating on the development and standardization of Best Available
Techniques for Exploitation Activities;
(d) undertaking joint Consultation and educational awareness programmes for
Interested Persons relating to activities in the Area;
(e) facilitating the implementation of contractor management and monitoring
programmes to Mitigate the Environmental Impact of Exploitation Activities in
the Area;
(f) contributing to longer-term research programmes and management
response strategies targeted at the management of any significant Residual
Environmental Effects, including environmental rehabilitation and
remediation techniques;
(g) collaborating with the Authority and scientific community to identify and
develop best practices, improve existing standards and protocols with regard
to the collection, sampling, standardization, assessment and management of
data and information; and
(h) in conjunction with the Authority, promoting the advancement of marine
scientific research in the Area for the benefit of mankind as a whole.
92

[Page 93]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
xx. The Contractor shall assure the readiness and effectiveness of resources, including
equipment, under its Emergency Response and Contingency Plan and that response
procedures are regularly tested in accordance with such Plan.
93

[Page 94]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Schedule 1
Use of terms and scope
“Acceptable” in relation to a risk, means a level of risk for which the time, cost or effort of
further reducing it would be grossly disproportionate to the benefits of such reduction. In
assessing whether the time, cost or effort would be grossly disproportionate to the benefits of
further reducing the risk, regard shall be had to best practice risk levels compatible with the
Exploitation Activities being undertaken.
“Adaptive Management” is a planned and systematic process for continuously improving
environmental management practices by learning about their outcomes. Adaptive
management provides flexibility to identify and implement new Mitigation measures or to
modify existing ones during the life of a mining project.
[“Areas of Particular Environmental Interest” means areas designated for the protection
of the deep sea environment, where mining activities are not permitted in accordance with an
approved [Regional Environmental Management].
[“Benthic Plume” means a stream of water containing suspended particles of sea floor
sediment, abraded manganese nodules and macerated benthic biota that emanates from the
mining collector as a result of collector disturbance of the sea floor and spreads in a zone
close to the sea floor].64
[“Best Practicable Environmental Option” means, for a given set of Environmental
Objectives, the option that provides the most benefits or least damage to the Marine
Environment, as a whole, at acceptable cost, in the long term as well as the short term.]
“Best Available Scientific Evidence” means the best scientific information and data
accessible and attainable that, in the particular circumstances, is of good quality and
objective, within reasonable technical and economic constraints and based on Internationally
Recognized scientific practices, standards, technologies, and methodologies.
“Best Available Techniques” means the latest stage of development, state of the art
processes, of facilities or of methods of operation that indicate the practical suitability of a
particular measure for the prevention, reduction and control of pollution and the protection of
the Marine Environment from the harmful effects of Exploitation Activities.
“Best Environmental Practices” means the application of the most appropriate
combination of environmental control measures and strategies, [including Best Available
Techniques].
Commentary: the requirement for BEP and its application is paramount under a Plan of
Work and must be assessed fully at the application stage and applied throughout the
mining life cycle. Its application has temporal aspect and will change over time as scientific
knowledge grows, technology advances and changes in social and economic factors. [The
above definition has tentatively incorporated BAT, is this acceptable?].
64 ISBA/19/LTC/8 at 30.
94

[Page 95]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
“Biodiversity” means the variability among living organisms from all sources including, inter
alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which
they are part: this includes diversity within species, between species and of ecosystems.
Closure plan means a plan required to be produced and submitted to the Authority under
these regulations.
“Consult” and “Consultation” means
(a) provide appropriate access to up-to-date and comprehensive Environmental
Information in accessible terminology and format.
(b) provide reasonable opportunity for those consulted to raise enquiries and to make
known their views.
(c) record those views in written form and, where appropriate, provide that record to
Interested Persons.
(d) consider those views in the Authority’s administration and management of
Exploitation Activities; and
(e) continue or repeat these processes, as appropriate, if the subject matter of a prior
Consultation substantially alters (including as a result of prior Consultation).
“Cumulative Impact(s)” is the impact on the Marine Environment resulting from the
incremental impact of Exploitation Activities when added to other past, present or reasonably
foreseeable activities in the Area and can include individually minor but collectively significant
activities occurring over a period of time.
[“Cumulative Impact Assessment [see IFC’s Guidance Notes: Performance Standards on
Environmental and Social Sustainability].
“Direct Impacts” means impacts caused as a direct result of Exploitation Activities, such as
loss of habitat and populations owing to removal of substrates or other materials and
occurring at the same time and location.
“Discharge” includes any release, disposal, spilling, leaking, pumping, emitting, or emptying,
but does not include Dumping.
“Dumping” has the meaning set-out in Article 1(1)(5) of the Convention.
“Environmental Evaluation or Evaluation” means the evaluation of the Environmental
Plans in accordance with these Regulations by the Authority on the basis of an assessment
of the Environmental Impacts in connection with a Plan of Work submitted under the
Exploitation Regulations.
“Environmental Effect” includes any positive or negative effect, any temporary or
permanent effect, any past, present or future effect, any cumulative effect that arises over
time or in combination with other effects, any potential effect of high probability and any
potential effect of low probability that has a high potential impact.
“Emergency Response and Contingency Plan” means a planned course of action
developed and documented by an Applicant and based on Good Industry Practice to respond
quickly to and Mitigate the impact of Incidents or accidents that may arise and which may
cause imminent danger of damage to the Marine Environment or human health and safety.
“Environmental Objective” is an overall environmental goal, consistent with an
environmental policy, that the Authority sets to achieve.
95

[Page 96]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
“Emergency Order” means an environmental protection notice issued under these
Regulations.
“Environmental Baseline” means the starting point (a certain date or state) against which
the changes in the condition of a variable or a set of variables are measured.
“Environmental Impact Assessment” is the identification and systematic study of the
baseline of existing environmental conditions, and identifying, predicting, evaluating the
significance of and Mitigating the Environmental Impacts, taking into account interrelated
socio-economic, historic, cultural and human health impacts, both beneficial and adverse,
and in Consultation with Interested Persons. The results of such assessment to be compiled
in a document known as the Environmental Impact Statement.65
“Environmental Impact” means any likely impacts on the Marine Environment arising from
the conduct of Exploitation Activities, including social, cultural and historic considerations and
human health, being positive, negative, direct, indirect, temporary or permanent, or
Cumulative Impacts arising over time or in combination with other mining impacts.
“Environmental Impact Area”66 means that area of the Marine Environment where
Environmental Impacts (Direct, Indirect, Cumulative and/or interactive) are likely to occur as a
result of Exploitation Activities, including the Mining Area, adjacent, surrounding and far-field
areas as documented in the Environmental Impact Statement.
Commentary: the Environmental Impact Area will need to be identified / assessed prior to
the conduct of an environmental impact assessment. Further investigation during an EIA
process may modify this area. Equally, consideration should be given to any social /
cultural impacts as may modify such areas.
“Environmental Impact Statement” means a document, the content and format of which is
prescribed by and to be approved under these Regulations to detail the likely Environmental
Impact of Exploitation Activities based on an Environmental Impact Assessment.
“Environmental Liability Trust Fund” means a fund established by regulation [ ].
“Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan” means a plan to document the
methods and procedures to be implemented in order to monitor, manage and Mitigate the
Environmental Impacts identified in the Environmental Impact Statement.
“Environmental Management System” means that part of the overall management system
applied by a Contractor that includes organizational structure, planning activities,
responsibilities, practices, procedures, processes and resources for developing,
implementing, achieving, reviewing and maintaining environmental policy, goals and
Environmental Performance.
“Environmental Offset” means an action or actions taken in accordance with these
Regulations, after all reasonable Mitigation measures have been applied, to compensate or
counterbalance significant Residual Environmental Changes resulting from Exploitation
Activities in the Area, by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments.
65See also ISBA/20/C/13 at 6.
66 This also needs to be considered in the context of strategic planning and management by the
Authority and the cumulative impact of aggregate exploitation operations.
96

[Page 97]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
“Environmental Performance” means the extent to which a Contractor has achieved the
Environmental Objectives, Environmental Targets and other Monitoring and management
deliverables under an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan.
“Environmental Plans” means collectively the Environmental Impact Statement, the
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan, the Closure Plan and the Emergency
Response and Contingency Plan (as it relates to the Marine Environment) to be prepared
and approved in accordance with these Regulations. [Note: harmonize with definition in
Exploitation Regulations].
“Environmental Risk Assessment” means the risk process for evaluating the likelihood
and consequence of Environmental Impacts using International Recognized Standards.
“Environmental Target” means a qualitative or quantitative statement on the desired
condition of the different components of the Marine Environment in respect of the areas
impacted by Exploitation Activities, established in accordance with these Regulations and the
Authority’s guidelines67 and, where practicable, be specific, measurable, achievable, realistic
and time limited.
“Evaluation Report” is a report prepared by the Commission on the outcome of its
consideration of environmental matters relating to a proposed Plan of Work, its evaluation of
the adequacy of the Environmental Plans together with its recommendations to the Council.
“Exploitation Regulations” means the Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on
Exploitation for Mineral Resources in the Area
“Impact Reference Zones” means areas used to Monitor the effect of activities in the Area
on the Marine Environment; must be representative of the environmental characteristics
(physical, chemical, biological) of the Mining Area.
“Indirect Impact” means impacts on the Marine Environment that are caused by
Exploitation Activities, and are later in time or farther removed from a Mining Area but are still
reasonably foreseeable [or as a result of a complex pathway (physical, chemical and
biological)]. May be referred to as secondary impacts.
[Indirect Impact Area” means [ ]. May be referred to as secondary impact area].
“Interested Person(s)” means a natural or juristic person or an association of persons that,
in the opinion of the Authority, is directly affected by the carrying out of Exploitation Activities
in the Area or who has relevant information or expertise.
“Marine Scientific Research” means, for the purposes of these Regulations, scientific
activities undertaken in the Marine Environment to enhance scientific knowledge regarding
the nature and natural processes of the seas and oceans, the seabed and subsoil thereof
[conducted in accordance with international law].
“Material Change”68 means a change, not being a minor or administrative change, to the
basis on which the original report, document or plan, including a Plan of Work, was accepted
or approved by the Authority including, inter alia, physical modifications, availability of new
67 Annex IV of Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008
establishing a framework for community action in the field of marine environmental policy (Marine
Strategy Framework Directive) provides an Indicative list of characteristics to be taken into account for
setting environmental targets.
68 Needs to be “harmonized” with draft regulation 18 of the Exploitation Regulations.
97

[Page 98]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
knowledge or technology and operational management changes, according to the Authority’s
guidelines.
“Mining Discharge” means the disposal, Dumping and Discharge into the Marine
Environment of SWOE, made as an integral part of, or as a direct result of activities in the
Area or from shipboard processing immediately above a Contract Area of minerals derived
from a Mining Area.
“Mitigate” and “Mitigation” includes:69
a) avoiding an impact altogether by undertaking taking or not undertaking a certain
activity or parts of an activity.
b) minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the activity and its
implementation.
c) [rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected Marine
Environment].70
d) reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance
operations during the life of the mining activity.
e) Environmental Offset.
“Monitor” or “Monitoring” means the systematic sampling and assessment of the Marine
Environment in order to observe, study, detect or measure the Environmental Effects against,
where practicable, quantitative and qualitative Environmental Targets.
“Natural Resources of the Area” means [to be defined in the context of Article 145(b) of the
Convention but excluding the Resources of the Area??].
“Natural environmental impact” means any environmental impact that may result from
natural events or disasters.
“Pollution” shall have the same meaning as Article 1(4) of the Convention.
“Preservation Reference Zones” means areas representative of the Mining Area, but in
which no mining shall occur and used to Monitor changes in the biological status of the
Marine Environment caused by or likely to be caused by mining activities.
“Protection Measures” means the necessary measures taken or to be taken to Mitigate
Environmental Impacts.
“Residual Environmental [Impact / Effect]” means the Environmental [Impact/Effect]
remaining after the cessation, or suspension, of Exploitation Activities in the Mining Area.
“Restoration” includes the process of assisting the recovery and management of the
ecological integrity of marine ecosystems affected by Exploitation Activities in the Area.
[“Seabed Mining Sustainability Fund” means a fund established by the Authority under
regulation [ ]].
[“Seabed Mining Sustainability Fund Levy” means a payment to be made by [ ] to the
Seabed Sustainability Fund in accordance with the Exploitation Regulations].71
69 See §1508.20 Mitigation, Regulations for Implementing the Procedural Provisions of the National
Environmental Policy Act.
70 Though restoration may be possible / plausible, it is considered highly uncertain as an effective
measure currently. Further research is required.
98

[Page 99]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
“Sediment” means the organic and inorganic material extracted from the seabed by
Exploitation Activities, and includes tailings.
[“Surface Plume” is a stream of water containing suspended particles of sea floor sediment,
abraded manganese nodules and macerated benthic biota resulting from the separation, on
board the mining vessel, of the nodules from the water carrier and spreads in a zone closer
than Benthic Plume to the ocean surface].72
“SWOE” means sediments, wastes and other effluents including mine tailings73 and water
evacuated from the Minerals during shipboard processing.
“Serious Harm to the marine environment” means any effect from activities in the Area on
the Marine Environment which represents a Significant Adverse Change in the Marine
Environment determined according to the rules, regulations and procedures adopted by the
Authority, on the basis of Internationally Recognized Standards and practices.74
“Significant Adverse Change” [means important harmful changes in ecosystem diversity
and integrity, the productivity of the biological communities within the Marine Environment; or
the threat to human health through direct exposure to pollutants, or through consumption of
exposed aquatic organisms; or important loss of aesthetic, recreational, scientific, or
economic values].75
“Strategic Environmental Management Plan (Regional)” means a plan prepared by the
Authority to manage, monitor, mitigate, assess and evaluate with the objective of the effective
protection of the Marine Environment from Exploitation Activities within a defined area of the
Area.
“Substantial Evidence” means Best Available Scientific Evidence consisting of relevant,
adequate and well-informed studies and research conducted and assessed by Appropriately
Qualified Experts qualified to evaluate Environmental Impacts and Effects in the Area and
where it can reasonably be concluded by such experts, on the basis of such evidence and
reasonable scientific confidence, there is a risk of Serious Harm to the Marine Environment.
“Unforeseen Serious Harm” means Serious Harm that is not reasonably foreseeable at the
time of any evaluation by the Commission.
“Vulnerable Marine Ecosystem” means any marine ecosystem identified as such in
accordance with the criteria and guidelines adopted by the Authority in accordance with these
71 Further work is required on the rationale for and consequential funding mechanism for this Fund.
72 ISBA/19/LTC/8 at 30.
73 In the case of PN, this would include the spreading and deposition of sediments from mining activities
at the seafloor.
74 The operationalization of “serious harm” is a Priority Deliverable.
75 The related criteria for SAC will need to be developed through an expert working group. To formulate
a meaningful definition is too simplistic. The term is potentially resource and site-specific, depending on
the criteria to be adopted. There is no scientific basis for “significant adverse change”. The resilience of
marine ecosystem(s) to mining activities and the development of thresholds or tipping points (and
indicators) are of much greater relevance to science. Other definitions exist e.g. Council Regulation (EC)
No 734/2008 of 15 July 2008 on the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems in the high seas from
the adverse impacts of bottom fishing gears: “significant adverse impacts” means impacts (evaluated
individually, in combination or cumulatively) which compromise ecosystem integrity in a manner that
impairs the ability of affected populations to replace themselves and that degrades the long-term natural
productivity of habitats, or causes on more than a temporary basis significant loss of species richness,
habitat or community types
99

[Page 100]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
Regulations and based on internationally accepted principles.76
76 Characteristics to be used in identifying vulnerable marine ecosystems have been defined in
connection with other regimes e.g. including the UN FAO International Guidelines for the Management
of Deep-Sea Fisheries in the High Seas, FAO 2009.
100

[Page 101]
A Discussion Paper on the development and drafting of Regulations on Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters)
101