[Page 1]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED
MINERAL RESOURCES
2/7/2014 Developing Financial Terms for Deep Sea Mining Exploitation
Chris G Brown
Chartered Tax Adviser
chrisgbrown@live.co.uk
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 1

[Page 2]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
“All things being equal (including tax), a country should attract
exploration investment proportional to its international geological
attractiveness rating. If investment is less, it implies other faults
in the investment climate, such as excessive tax. However, if
investment is greater than geological potential, investment
conditions may be overly generous”.
EITI Advancing the EITI in the Mining Sector: A consultation with stakeholders EITI 2009
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 2

[Page 3]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Table of Contents
4
•Important messages
1 •Object: to highlight a number of key themes that LTC members should be conscious of during the reading this Working Paper.
6
•Abbreviations & acronyms
2
•Executive Summary 7
3 •An overview of key findings, recommendations & suggestions
•Introduction & background 18
4 •Object: to set the scene & highlight key trends in mining fiscal regimes
•Policy objectives & financial principles 30
•Object: to identify & discuss all known policy objectives and financial principles under the law / general principles in designing a
5 fiscal mechanism. To identify core criteria against which a system of payments can be measured
•A primer on mining taxation 42
6 •Object: to provide LTC Members with an overview of the key elements of mining fiscal regimes
•Mining phases - typical accounting & fiscal treatments 53
7 • Object: to present an overview of the typical accounting, tax & royalty treatments as various mining stages / phases
•Interaction between DSM actors 58
8 •Object: to highlight and discuss the challenges inherent in competing objectives
•Valuation - the starting point 65
9 •Object: to define the valuation point for DSM activities
•Fiscal mechanisms and financial payments 72
10 •Object: to provide an overview of a variety of payment mechanisms and rates of payment
•Environmental considerations and financial terms 117
11 •Object: to provide an overview of key environmental legal obligations and areas for consideration impacting financial terms
•Contractor incentives & ISA risk mitigation 126
12 •Object: to consider some possible incentives to encourage investment / mitigate contractor risk
•Annexures 132
•Glossary of terms
13 •Useful information
•Bibliography & websites
•Miscellaneous data - mine production / GDP
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 3

[Page 4]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. Important messages and supported politically the debate around the true value of
non-renewable resources - the resource nationalisation debate;
LTC Members & ISA Secretariat should be conscious of the
 The Working Paper does not develop further the concept of a
following points in reading the contents of this Working Paper:
Hybrid Social Business Model / Corporate Social Responsibility
 The Working Paper has been prepared utilizing publicly initiatives contemplated by ISA Technical Study: No. 11. This is
available resources on the worldwide web; an area that should be covered in a Stakeholder Survey;
 It presents a high level desktop review of mining tax regimes  The Working Paper does not consider any form of equity
relevant to the main minerals due for extraction from the deep participation by the ISA as is the practice under some mining
ocean floor; regimes as this was not contemplated by the 1994
 There are many State mining fiscal regimes which have not yet Implementation Agreement. In practice, this will be achieved
been reviewed; the study has been limited in the main to the through involvement by the Enterprise;
top mine production States accounting for some 80% of world  No consideration has been given to any auctioning or up-front
mine production of the selected minerals according to the latest bonus mechanism;
data available from the US Geological Survey;  No detailed consideration has been made of any financial issues
 Government fiscal mining policies and regimes remain in a high or considerations specific to the operation of the Enterprise;
state of flux and continual stakeholder review following the  Any recommendations, conclusions and models proposed by the
2008 global financial crisis and the introduction of higher levies LTC should ultimately be tested and supported by economic
on the mining sector generally; analysis and detailed financial modeling.
 While the CHM principle embodies social justice, this has gained
further support and momentum globally since the conclusion of
the 1994 Implementation Agreement. This has also impacted
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 4

[Page 5]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Suggested process flow for discussions
1. Determine overriding CHM objectives and principles - agree main criteria
2. Identify key commercial & financial drivers - unique DSM features
3. Build-in Environmental drivers & impacts
4. Agree valuation point(s) for the DSM process
5. Review existing mining & petroleum mechanisms / regimes
6. Consider range of rates of payment
7. Suggest mechanism(s) & range(s)
8. Validate against objectives and principles
9. Build findings into Preliminary Stakeholder Survey
10. Economic analysis and financial modelling / feeback from Survey
11. Broad stakeholder consultation
12. Draft Exploitation Regulations for approval
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 5

[Page 6]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
2. Abbreviations used in this Working Paper
CEE Canadian exploration expenses IMF International monetary fund
CHM Common heritage of mankind IRZ Impact reference zones
CIF Carriage, insurance, freight IRR Internal rate of return
CIT Corporate income tax ISA International Seabed Authority
CP Commercial production LME London metal exchange
CRD Capital recognition deduction LOSC United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
CSR Corporate social responsibility 10 December 1982
DB Declining balance LTC Legal and Technical Commission
DSM Deep seabed mining LTBR Long-term bond rate
DTA Double tax agreement MRRT Minerals resource rent tax
EBIT Earnings before interest and tax MSR Marine scientific research
EBITDA Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and NPV Net present value
amortisation NSR Net smelter return
EI Extractive industries OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
EIA Environmental impact assessment Development
EITI Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative PBT Profit before tax
EMP Environmental management plan PN Polymetallic nodules
ETR Effective tax rate PRZ Preservation reference zones
FOB Free on Board R&D Research and development
FMV Free market value RRP Rules, regulations and procedures
GAAP Generally accepted accounting principles RRT Resource rent tax
GDP Gross domestic product RSPT Resource Super Profits Tax
IA 1994 Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI SL Straight-line
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the TS Technical study
Sea of 10 December 1982 WHT Withholding tax
ICMM International Council on Mining and Minerals WP Working paper
IFRS International financial reporting standards
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 6

[Page 7]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
3. Executive summary
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 7

[Page 8]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
3. Executive Summary
Report Terms of Reference A state of flux & continuing design
The author of this working paper was commissioned by the In reading this paper, LTC members should appreciate that the
International Seabed Authority (ISA) to prepare a study of taxation of extractive resources is in a state of flux as
comparable extractive industry fiscal regimes for presentation to governments seek to balance their fair share of rent while at the
the Legal and Technical Commission (LTC) of the ISA in same time balancing investment in-flows.
February 2014.
Significant research in the field of extractive industries and
Report Context related taxation has already been undertaken by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the
The main purpose of the study is to assist the LTC in the further
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
development of the Mining Code, specifically the financial terms
(OECD). Specifically, the IMF has conducted a number of in-
applicable to the exploitation of polymetallic nodules (PN) in the
country reviews and continues its consultative process on the
Area.
Taxation of Natural Resource Rents in developing countries.
The ISA has produced Technical Study No. 11 Towards the
The financial terms ultimately agreed to ISA member States will
Development of a Regulatory Framework for Polymetallic Nodule
give rise to a unique system, being a first truly global fiscal
Exploitation in the Area. TS No. 11 has outlined some of the
system.
guiding principles, issues and challenges connected with the
development of a fiscal regime. Possible options referred to
include an economic rent to capture surplus (windfall) revenues
together with a royalty regime, incorporating a potential Delimitation
environmental levy.
This paper does not include any detailed economic analysis or
projection of likely revenues to the ISA. Equally, it does not consider
This working paper aims to build upon that study by looking into
the economic impact on either Sponsoring States or Contractors. The
specific mining tax regimes currently in place and to present a
modelling of any proposed regime is essential to determine its impact
starting point for stakeholder discussions and negotiations.
on the progressivity of any proposed regime.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 8

[Page 9]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
18 key findings…
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 9

[Page 10]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. The complex financial 2. Financial terms are 3. Detailed financial
interaction between all not independent and modelling and economic
parties drives the need must be seen as part of analysis is required to
for an international a total package support any high level
conference of key including environmental findings.
stakeholders. impacts, CSR and CHM
benefit sharing.
4. 5. 6.
Some land-based There is one simple There is a complex
mining fiscal regimes trade-off in any trade-off & discussion
are now inherently payment mechanism: between the division of
flawed. Many are in administrative capacity normal profit and
transition. versus optimal (best) economic rents.
revenue opportunity.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 10

[Page 11]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
7. 8. 9.
Fiscal transparency Aligning financial A full understanding
in Extractive Industries accounting of the DSM value chain
is driving exponential requirements and profit is needed to determine
change. EITI principles share will reduce an appropriate valuation
will need to be reflected administrative point.
in the ISA financial complexities.
regime.
10. 11. 12.
Establish a trust Whether a A “safety valve”
fund to cover damage to premium should be should be built-in to the
the environment not attached to the non- mechanism which kicks
covered by the LOSC / renewable nature of in during periods of high
contracting parties mineral resources is pricing or end of mine
(ITLOS undecided. life.
recommendation).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 11

[Page 12]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
13. 14. 15.
In developing any A profit / rent-share Closure &
incentives for attracting model need not be reclamation require
unnecessarily complicated.
investments these upfront consideration
But any discussion over
should be specific, under the payment
defining acceptable levels
targeted, costed and mechanism.
of financial return is
temporary. Some
complex.
country incentives make
little financial sense.
16. 17. 18.
The payment The treatment of The concept of a
mechanism must exploration costs “fair and equitable”
support commercially requires close attention share among mining
sound principles. It and careful participants has yet to
must not support consideration. be determined.
wasteful & inefficient
mining practices.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 12

[Page 13]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Executive Summary
Fiscal models in the mining sector are becoming overly complex. This is not surprising. A reduction in income tax rates (a major driver
of fiscal revenues) in the 1980s onwards combined with a commodity price boom in the 2000s afforded mining enterprises the perceived
opportunity to reap economic profits. Since that period, there has been increasing temptation to raise tax and royalty rates. Some of this
has been driven by political reaction that countries have not been receiving their fair share. Consequently, some States are bolting onto
perhaps a flawed foundation while others are retaining a traditional royalty base but increasing participation through equity stakes. This is
an attempt to secure a fair share. Equally, many developing States are restricted by historic fiscal stability agreements which prevent
increases in, and often promote reductions in, taxes normally applied to other sectors and mining-specific royalties.
A fair and equitable return remains at the very centre of this debate. A fair financial return is often cited as the primary objective for a
resource owner followed closely by the appropriate level of risk-sharing between the resource owner and miner; a system of payments that
does not have a distortionary impact on reasonable commercial reward (for example, “excessive” royalties) and relatively simple
administration for all parties. This is a very tall order for any system. There are, as yet, no objective criteria to determine a fair and equitable
share.
One trend that has driven much in the way of change in the extractive industries sector is transparency. This fundamental principle
has driven partly the resource nationalisation debate. The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, being a coalition of governments,
industry and society is forging openness and accountability in revenue streams and the overall management of natural resources. This is
being translated into national law across the globe.
In the 21st century, under both the common heritage of mankind principle and sustainable development, that fair and equitable
share must embrace, the environment and communities as stakeholders – the social licence to operate.
Any fiscal model must support commercially sound practices and promote environmental objectives. Many models are potentially
supporting wasteful and inefficient practices in an attempt to secure investment. Capital investment is mobile. The DSM financial regime
should promote commercial principles and objectives in parallel with social responsibility objectives. Environmental objectives must also be
incorporated into the financial regime with a mix of both a carrot (incentive) and stick (penalty) approach.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 13

[Page 14]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Exploration and development costs, exchange impacts, mineral commodity prices and geological prospects have a far greater
significance to the economics and commercial viability of deep sea mining projects than a reasonable payment mechanism.
Consequently, any regime needs to be robust, responsive, flexible and non-discriminatory in addressing these specifics.
The mining sector should be no more complicated to tax than other business sectors. This is very true. However, given the levels of
risk, capital investment and a desire by States to attract that investment, mining (and petroleum) models have generally received special
fiscal treatment compared to other business sectors.
Best fiscal practice to date suggests a minimal flow of revenue to a resource owner and “progressivity”. That is, a minimum royalty
base and progressive models of taxation which share incrementally in mining revenues. The higher the operating margin on a mining
project, the higher the government take. But this is has not been adopted in all cases due to capacity / administrative constraints and
industry opposition.
There are regional trends in the development of specific mining fiscal models. In the South and Middle America region, specifically
Chile, Peru, Mexico and Uruguay, additional profit tax models have been adopted. The African continent has generally retained royalty
structures, with a upward trend in royalty rates. Canada, having remained largely stable for many years, is reviewing its mining models;
Quebec is now proposing a re-structured but progressive mining tax; Indonesia and the Philippines are in a state of change and Australia is
seeking to remove its mineral resource rent tax from the statute book.
Rent resource tax (RRT) models have yet to be fully tried and tested for the mining sector. RRTs have been successfully deployed in
the petroleum sector, particularly Norway, but not, as yet, in the mining sector. There are a number of factors that influence this. Relatively
stable pricing and regimes in the petroleum sector compared to metal commodities, which are more susceptible to economic cycles. RRTs
have a theoretical, economic appeal in the mining sector. Their objective is clear but their design is difficult. Their administration however, is
no more complex than a profit income tax model.
A fundamental principle of the 1994 Implementation Agreement is that deep sea miners are neither afforded a competitive
advantage nor be placed at a competitive disadvantage. In effect the ISA regime must be internationally competitive.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 14

[Page 15]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Key suggestions & recommendations
LTC Members will understand that some of the suggestions and recommendations below will also require validation by economic analysis
and modelling, by the results of a preliminary Stakeholder Survey and through subsequent consultation with stakeholders, particularly
contractors.
1 There needs to be a minimum flow of revenue to the ISA through a production / royalty-based mechanism.
o Royalties are not particularly sensitive to mine profitability. Therefore, a reasonable ad valorem royalty (c.2%-4%) should be
imposed on “sales”. This would be within the range of existing regimes though “sales” requires a clear definition and valuation
point. As a royalty is not linked to profitability, this will produce an assured (albeit minimum) flow of revenue from the point of
commercial production1 (see below).
2 That a profit-share / royalty on profit mechanism or progressive royalty structure is considered which targets normal profit
(akin to a land-based corporate income tax model)
o In order to satisfy both best practice (progressivity) and being within a range of rates of payment.
o The range of CIT rates in this study is 16% - 40% with a median point of 28%.
o The mechanism itself needs to be fully considered and encompass forward-looking capacity and administrative constraints and
accounting model/ system. There are additional staff cost & system implications.
o That consideration is given to the treatment of the key drivers of the profit-base:
 Treatment of pre-production, exploration, development expenses and capital expenditure;
 Rehabilitation and restoration expenditure (where relevant) / environmental fund treatment; and
 Transfer pricing / arm’s length valuations.
o Need to establish a “taxing point” for a profit share mechanism.
3 That an additional profit share mechanism is built-in which is incremental to the profit mechanism above.
o This should, in theory, be targeted at economic rents (longer term).
o This is a particularly complex area and opinion seems to be evenly divided on the merits of a resource rent tax.
o Consequently, consideration can also be given to an additional profit tax (similar to that imposed in Chile and other States) which
is more progressive than an ordinary income tax model. Can combine 2 and 3.
o Trends in this area need to be monitored as being “within a range”.
1 Assuming any royalty will commence at the point of commercial production and not before.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 15

[Page 16]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
4 Point of Valuation and the Value Chain
o This is critical and underpins the entire process for the financial payments mechanism.
o A full review of all possible scenarios in the DSM value chain is needed to determine the valuation point for sales revenues
(royalties) and expenses.
5 In view of the many financial and other uncertainties that surround the DSM regime, there may be merit in considering an
interim / transitional model. That is, the phasing / adjusting of a financial regime and mechanism over a reasonable timeframe
as economic models and behaviour develop.
6 “Commercial production”: this term is at times difficult to define absolutely. It is often subjective unless production levels or
capacity design levels are agreed upfront. It is recommended that a discussion take place over its value in a DSM / Area context. This
may be dependent on the payment mechanism that is ultimately adopted.
7 That consideration be given to an Environmental Trust Fund
o This needs to be included in a Stakeholder Survey: the base of its calculation / contribution rate.
8 Exploration costs: though considered in 2. above, this is an area that requires some further thought in terms of treatment and its on-
going reporting, including the quality of reporting.
9 Desktop reviews should be undertaken on the following areas:
o Environmental taxation: best practice and trends. Though this can be encompassed in the Stakeholder Survey;
o Dead rents: to benchmark a range of dead rents and / or other similar fees;
o EITI guidelines and standards and applicable / relevant practices for LTC consideration.
10 In due course, it would seem sensible to establish an appropriate benchmark for the ISA’s fair share e.g. X% of accounting
profits against which to assess the constituent elements of the ultimate ISA mechanism.
 It is suggested that discussions at this preliminary stage focus on a best payments model / system for the ISA financial share
and the incorporation of specific environmental objectives rather than any detailed discussion over rates of payment. These
discussions and open issues can then be reflected as necessary in the Stakeholder Survey.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 16

[Page 17]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Update – March 2015
Since the preparation and circulation of this Working Paper to the LTC in February 2014, a number of areas and developments warrant specific
mention.
1. Stakeholder Survey: since the preparation of this Working Paper, the ISA published a survey to stakeholders in March 2014. The result of
that survey will be built into a number of discussion papers for circulation to stakeholders, including a paper relating to financial terms.
2. Transparency: Canada has now implemented transparency obligations under federal law.2 This will require Canadian businesses engaged
in extractive industries to report various types of payments made, including those to foreign governments. In December 2014, KPMG
International published a report demonstrating the move toward the disclosure of payments by mining companies is no longer a question of
“if” but how much should be disclosed.3 Equally, the work being undertaken by the OECD on transfer pricing and profit shifting is also
driving taxpayer disclosure.4
3. Fair share: the issue of a fair share continues to be discussed with continued activity in resource nationalism (increased royalties, taxation,
government ownership). It is fundamental that the development of a policy (and supporting legal / financial framework) is undertaken in
consultation with relevant stakeholders, particularly investors to drive a fair and balanced financial regime.
4. Changes in royalty and tax rates: a number of States have increased royalty rates including India: copper (from 4.2% to 4.62%);
managanese (from 4.2% to 5%). Chile is staging an increase in its corporate tax rate from October 2014; the rate will be 25% or 27%
depending on which tax regime is chosen.5 One of the first contract renegotiations (nickel) in Indonesia has seen an increase in royalties
from 0.6%-0.7% to 2%-3% together with a requirement to divest further foreign-held interest to local investors.6 Zambia has increased its
headline royalty rates from 6% to 20% in the case of open-pit mining (underground from 6% to 8%).7 Australia’s MRRT was abolished
effective 1 October 2014.
2 Extractive Sector Transparency Measures Act.
3 KPMG Global Mining Institute Trends in taxation: coping withj transparency, mining royalties and volatility KPMG International, December 2014.
4 It should be remembered that these largely apply to multinational groups. Activities in the Area will be conducted by States and State enterprises and a unique set of
challenges will present themselves.
5 Effective (distributed) rates will range from 35% to 44.45%.
6 EY Resource nationalism update November 2014.
7 It is reported that over 50% of copper miners are now operating at a loss: see EY Resource nationalism update February 2015.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 17

[Page 18]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
4. Introduction & background
- Industry challenges
- The LOSC and the 1994 Implementation Agreement
- Trends in mining taxation
- Examples of recent changes
- Fiscal stability agreements
- Commercial principles / social justice
- The non-renewable nature of mineral resources
- Concluding remarks
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 18

[Page 19]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Introduction & background companies in the extractive industries to report what they pay to
governments and equally for governments to make public the
Between 2000 and 2010, the value of the global mining industry
payments they receive. Ultimately, the two need to be reconciled.
rose from US$214 billion to US$ 644 billion as a consequence of
increased output and increased metal prices.8 Industry challenges
Consequently, it is unsurprising that governments have sought (or While a detailed analysis of the challenges facing the global mining
are seeking) to capture an increased take from this value or what is industry are outside the scope of this WP, it is interesting to alert
perceived as windfall profits by investors. Generally however, this LTC Members to the impact of the resource nationalism debate in
reaction, at times “knee jerk”, has resulted in add-ons (additional the global mining sector.11 This remains one of the top challenges
royalties and/or additional profit taxes) to an existing regime.9 It is and risks to the mining industry with a number of countries taking
suspected that some of these regimes are now inherently flawed increased equity stakes in companies and ventures.12 These include
having been put together for political expediency rather than with Guatemala, Mongolia, Guinea and Namibia. As noted below, other
consideration to a longer term picture. Consequently, the very forms of resource nationalism includes the imposition of new taxes
foundations of mining tax structures could be unstable for the 21st and royalties (Chile, Peru, Brazil, Mexico and Australia to name a
century. This presents the ISA with both a challenge, given some of few).
the restrictions placed by the IA 1994 and an opportunity – an
A recent Chatham House study observed:
opportunity to get it right.
“At the heart of the problem is the absence of a practical formula
In addition to an overall increase in tax take, tax transparency is
or a benchmark to determine an equitable distribution of revenues
now a major agenda item. This includes incorporating the standards
between the state and companies in extractive ventures. Model
of the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) into
contracts of the 1990s have by and large failed to weather the
national legislation.10 In essence these standards require
which requires such mandatory reporting. Canada will also follow suit in respect of
mining and oil and gas companies.
11 See generally, Deloitte Tracking the trends 2013: The top 10 issues mining
8 ICMM Trends in the mining and metals industry: Mining’s contribution to companies may face in the coming year 2013; EY Resource nationalism update
sustainable development, October 2012. October 2013; EY Business risks facing mining and metals 2013-2014 (2013).
9 This reaction has been driven by increased transparency (EITI), the resource 12 Conflict between government and private investors is also rising dramatically
curse debate and publication of taxes paid. and a wider involvement by local communities relating to environmental
10 See G8 leaders promote transparency in mining PWC Mining Tax Update / degradation. See Stevens P, Kooroshy J, Lahn G and Lee B Conflict and
January–June 2013. See also Section 1504 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Coexistence in the Extractive Industries A Chatham House Report, November
Consumer Protection Act 2010 and the European Union’s Transparency Directive 2013.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 19

[Page 20]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
commodities price boom. According to the World Bank, more than operating costs compared to the oil and gas industry. Once a well is
30 countries have revised petroleum contracts or entire fiscal discovered and the infrastructure in place, petroleum “freely” flows.
regimes between 1999 and 2010. In mining, at least 25 Equally, the impact of OPEC in preventing abnormal price falls
governments (including most major mining countries) announced
contributes to a degree of income stability compared to most
or implemented tax or royalty increases in 2010 and 2011 alone.
mining commodities. There are, however, some parallels between
Revenue-sharing is often the frontline of company–government DSM and the petroleum sector relating to infrastructure
disputes. How to ensure a ‘fair share’ for each party remains an requirements and operational risk.
overriding challenge, and perceptions of fairness or equity are
The LOSC and the 1994 Implementation Agreement
heavily shaped not only by the changing domestic and
international context, but also by historical experience.”13
The informal consultations conducted by the UN Secretary-General
Consequently, some land-based mining regimes are now inherently in the lead up to the IA 1994 while not providing specific guidance
flawed, not least the division between “normal profit” and that of on the development of financial terms, do raise some interesting
“economic rents”. That said, much of this has stemmed from
observations.14
individually negotiated agreements. The ISA regime should not
The LOSC originally provided for two types of payment in respect of
suffer from this to a large degree – there will be one, non-
exploration and / or exploitation. Firstly, an application fee of
discriminatory regime. That said, the discussion over a fair share
US$500 000 and a fixed annual fee of US$1 million. The fixed fee
and normal versus economic rents remains relevant.
was set to ensure access to the Area by “serious” miners only.
There is a challenge in considering the issue of comparable rates of
The second type of payment presented contractors with a choice.
payment under the ISA fiscal mechanism as it is not possible to
Either the payment of a “production charge” (or royalty) only;15 this
predict the short or longer term nature of increased taxes and
was to based on the market value of processed minerals. Or the
levies on the land-based mining sector. Whatever the trend, some
combination of a production charge and a “share of net proceeds”
broad assumptions need to be made based on the current position
while making a system flexible and responsive to future change. 14 See generally Secretary-General’s Informal Consultations on Outstanding Issues
Relating to the Deep Seabed Mining Provisions of the United Nations Convention
Oil and gas regimes by contrast have been relatively stable, not on the Law of the Sea: Collected Documents, International Seabed Authority,
2002.
least in Norway. But the mining sector generally has higher
15 See Annex III, Article 13(5) being 5% and 12% of the market value of the
processed minerals in years 1-10 of commercial production and year 11 to the end
13 See Stevens Conflict and Coexistence in the Extractive Industries A Chatham of commercial production. The application of this paragraph was removed by the
House Report, November 2013 at xi. 1994 Agreement.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 20

[Page 21]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
in favour of the ISA. The ISA’s share of “attributable net proceeds” ensure optimum revenues for the Authority”.19 This wording
was “equivalent to the tax that a national government obtains from constituted an early principle as it was considered the issue was
mining profits”.16 The calculation was to be based on a three-tier highly technical and one to be left open for discussion. The
sliding scale determined by a return on investment and according to principle, however, was not reflected in the final wording. Again,
the first period of commercial production and the second period of this is an area that could severely undermine the economic
commercial production. The share varied between 35% and 70% of efficiency of any financial regime and will continue to be of
attributable net proceeds. The theory behind this approach is that fundamental interest to commercial investors.
the second period equates to a resource rent, taxable at a higher
rate – equivalent to a domestic additional profit tax or RRT.
Without the full cooperation, transparency and profit-take
Concerns were raised, however, during the informal consultations
arrangement between all actors, including sponsoring and / or
that this system was too burdensome, both financially and
home country States, any optimal (best) fiscal model may
administratively.17
prove unworkable in practice.
Equally, it was considered that mining States, under too lenient an
ISA fiscal regime could levy their own national taxes at the expense At the time it was considered that a production charge had three
of the international community.18 This remains a valid consideration merits: first, a stable source of revenue for the ISA and a relatively
today. well-known basis for contractors. Secondly, both the ease of
monitoring for the ISA and accounting obligations of a contractor
There are two points of further interest in the discussion. First,
and thirdly, it relieves the ISA to monitor beyond those “activities in
early wording referred to the “rates of taxation” and “rates of
the Area”, being transportation, processing and metal marketing.
financial payments” rather than “rates of payments”. Secondly, that
“States must respect the extra-territorial nature of deep seabed While these statements hold true, a production charge would still
mining in the international area and should avoid or minimize require the ISA to undertake a process to verify pricing on which
double taxation on the proceeds of deep seabed mining in order to the charge is calculated.
Later wording included “States shall cooperate with the Authority in
16 Secretary-General’s Informal Consultations on Outstanding Issues Relating to
order to review problems which may arise from payments to States
the Deep Seabed Mining Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea: Collected Documents, International Seabed Authority, 2002 at 59.
17 Ibid.
18 Ibid at 60. 19 Ibid at 60-61.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 21

[Page 22]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
by operators from the income of deep seabed exploitation and to There has been a general continuing trend to increase the overall
solve such problems”. tax burden on mining companies. This has both been through
increasing tax and royalty headline rates and also amendments to
the underlying base calculations.
There is, to date, no one single fiscal regime applicable to
extractive industries which is deemed to capture both For example, Brazil’s CFEM has both increased in rate but is now
government policy, including social benefits and reform, and applied to gross, as opposed to net revenues. Some territories have
investor satisfaction. introduced ring-fencing provisions in the last few years.
By contrast, fiscal regimes applicable to the oil and gas sector have
Trends in mining taxation both remained relatively stable and by and large more effective and
efficient in delivering policy goals, objectives and significant
Mineral tax regimes of the 1990’s have been the subject of much
revenues.
policy discussion and dynamic change. Extractive industry fiscal
regimes have also been the object of many high level debates, both Mining tax regimes should, at least in principle, be no more
theoretical and pragmatic, by distinguished experts. It would be complex than other business sectors. However, given the relative
safe to conclude that no single taxing authority has yet established importance of natural resources to some countries (particularly
an optimal tax base, or consequently the level of optimum reserves developing economies) and a desire to secure high levels of capital
and life of a mine. Indeed most systems have probably developed investment, attractive tax regimes have been structured to attract
out of a level of compromise than a true balance between revenue such investments. Yet, following commodity price rises in the 21st
stability and economic efficiencies. century, these structures have been found wanting in terms of an
equitable distribution of revenue between various stakeholders.
Mineral mining tax regimes remain in a high state of flux. Some
governments have introduced “windfall” profit taxes, most notably Indeed, the position has been further complicated by the
Australia, to varying degrees of controversy and success. This negotiation of specific arrangements (fiscal stability agreements).
period of instability is likely to continue as governments assess the Though such deals facilitate investment, they undermine a coherent
impact on both revenues and capital investment.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 22

[Page 23]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
and fair application of a tax regime and distort revenues. These to 25.5%22 and in 56 non-OECD countries from 29.2% to
concerns have led to recent “resource nationalisation” debates.20 24.8%.23
A full review of the various economic, social and political aspects
connected with the development of mining fiscal regimes is outside The table below shows the average corporate tax rate changes by
the scope of this paper. However, there are factors in the design of region since 2005.
fiscal regimes which have contributed to the current state of flux.
Changes in Average Corporate Tax Rates24
These can be summarised as follows:
Region (avg) 2005 (%) 2013 (%)
 In seeking to attract investment, fiscal regimes have recognised
the risks inherent in the mining industry – high levels of capital
Africa 30.82 28.57
investment over long periods of time, continued investment in
N America 38.05 33.00
exploration, optimising the life of a mine, rehabilitation costs
Asia 28.99 22.49
etc.21 These factors in the mining business cycle have generally Europe 23.70 20.60
resulted in attractive and generous tax treatment when Latin America 29.07 27.61
compared to other business sectors; and Oceania 30.60 27.00
Global 27.50 24.08
 A general reduction in the corporate income tax rates across
developed and developing countries over the last three
decades. Between 2005 and 2013 alone, a significant number of
As to royalties, the upper end of ad valorem royalties (single
countries reduced their statutory corporate income tax rates. In
instruments linked to sales value not market price or profitability) is
34 OECD countries, the average CIT rate dropped from 28.2% around 4-6%.25 This compares to rates typically being in the range
of 2-3% at the beginning of the century.
22 On a weighted average basis, the CIT rate dropped from 35.4% to 32.5%.
23 Chen D & Mintz J 2013 Annual Global Tax Competitiveness Ranking: Corporate
Tax Policy at a Crossroads Vol 6, Issue 35, November 2013, The School of Public
20 This is being effected in three ways: increased mining taxes and royalties; Policy, SPP Research Papers, University of Calgary.
mandatory beneficiation of minerals in-country (or the levy of excise duties) and 24 KPMG Corporate Tax Rates Table.
retaining full or partial ownership of the resources. 25 Otto considers in a land-based environment, a rate of 5%+ could force marginal
21 Some regimes have been criticised for being overly complex as well as overly mines to close during a low price cycle. See Otto JM Expert Opinion on Mine
generous in the preferential treatment of mining operations. Taxation Pertinent to the Sheshinski Committee II for the Review of Policy with
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 23

[Page 24]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
There are certainly regional trends. In Australia, royalty and levels of investment. Equally, there is the issue of administrative
profit-take mechanisms at a provincial / state level have remained capacity – on the whole royalties are generally simpler to
stable; however, at the federal level, Australia’s rent tax is now in administer.
jeopardy.
In 2011 Mongolia, an emerging producer of copper28 abandoned
In the Middle and South American Region, there has been a shift its additional profit tax and introduced a royalty surtax referenced
toward additional profit tax mechanisms based on operational to international pricing and lower rates on concentrates and product
margins (Chile and Peru) and adjusted profit (Mexico) rather to encourage local beneficiation.
than any increase in royalty rates. Though Brazil is an exception.
China introduced a resource tax in November 2011 to counter
Uruguay is the latest country (September 2013) to adopt a new
environmental degradation. India saw an increase in royalties in
large scale mining law including the adoption of a progressive tax
2009. Indonesia is currently in the process of renegotiating its
rate.26
mining contracts of work under the 2009 with royalties being the
In the African continent, there has been a general shift upwards in major sticking point.29 Indonesia is also introducing progressive
royalty rates, notably South Africa which did not previously levy export duties to force local processing.30
royalties and Zambia.27 Aside from headline rate increases there
Examples of recent changes
have been changes in the calculable base. For example, Tanzania
in 2010 changed the base from a net back to a gross value.
Mexico’s tax reform bill has been enacted. This sees the
Equally, a number of countries (Tanzania, Zambia, Liberia, corporate income tax (CIT) rate remain at 30%31 together with a
Mozambique and South Africa) have introduced ring-fencing
new mining tax levied at 7.5% of earnings before interest, taxation
provisions. There appears to be some hesitancy in adopting profit-
and depreciation / amortisation and a 10-year depreciation rate for
related regimes (on top of existing income tax structures). This is at
pre-mining expenses. This is effective 1 January 2014. Precious
times due to pressures from industry and a consequential impact on
28 Copper production is estimated to be c. 834 million metric tonnes by 2015. Tax
Respect to Royalties on Natural Resources formed by the Israeli Ministry of revenues from extractive industries have grown exponentially. Between 2010 and
Finance 4 November 2013 2011 revenues grew by 66% to US$ 1 518 million.
26 The progressive rate is calculated as (mining operating margin x 0.90 -0.25) x 29 “Royalties slow mining renegotiations” The Jakarta Post
100. The maximum is an operating margin of 0.70 (70%) which implies a maximum http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2014/02/03/royalties-slow-mining-
tax rate of 38%. renegotiations.html, 3 February 2014.
27 Its is reported that Zambia may further increase royalties from 6% to 10%: Govt 30 By 2017, companies will be required to undertake copper ore to copper cathode
to consider royalty tax increase-Yaluma, 31 January 2014, processing onshore. Currently a 20% export tax on unprocessed metals.
http://www.postzambia.com/post-read_article.php?articleId=44170. 31 Previous legislation enacted a 1% cut to 29% in 2014 and to 28% in 2015.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 24

[Page 25]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
metals are also subject to a 0.5% net smelter return royalty. Both and application of the rules by the South African Revenue
amounts are deductible for CIT. Services.33
In 2011, Peru adopted a new law with a tax of 1% to 12% on Ghana is seeking to reintroduce a windfall tax on mining profits at
operating profits; this replaced existing rates of between 1% and 10% on positive tax adjusted cash balances. In 2013, the country
3% of net sales. And a “special Tax” of between 2% and 8.4% introduced a National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy of 5% on company
depending on profit margins. profits; this is a temporary levy to reduce the budget deficit.34
The Philippine Mining Industry Co-ordinating Council has The Cote d’Ivoire sought recently to introduce a new mining
proposed a single tax regime of 10% of gross mining revenues to windfall tax on gold profits – upwards of 19%.35 This is now off the
replace principally all taxes and royalties, including CIT and table but there is likely to be a revision in royalties and the
royalties. The draft bill has been submitted to the President. country’s mining code generally.
On 1 March 2010, South Africa introduced a progressive royalty Angola has in fact reduced its corporate tax rate for mining to
regime based on EBIT, with a minimum royalty rate of 0.5% and a 25% (from 35%) to encourage investment flows.
maximum rate of between 5% and 7% depending on whether
On 9 September 2011, Guinea adopted a new Mining Code. This
minerals are refined or unrefined. However, the mining fiscal
included a new Extraction Tax of 3% on base metals and a
regime is now subject to much uncertainty. First, there is no RRT-
Production Tax of 5% for gold and silver. The country did however
style tax which would capture supernormal profits. This is however
reduce its CIT rate from 35% to 30%.
contained in the ANC’s Policy Document32 and would trigger at the
Treasury Long Bond Rate plus 7% (c.15%) with a reduction in
The Western Australian government is currently in consultation
royalty rates to 1%. Additionally there is much uncertainty in the
with stakeholders regarding its mining royalty system, which aims
treatment of deductions for capital expenditure and assessed losses
to achieve a 10% return on mine-head value.
33 See KPMG South Africa Mining companies seeking certainty on tax issues in the
forthcoming 2013 Budget Speech 27 February 2013.
http://www.kpmg.com/za/en/issuesandinsights/articlespublications/tax-and-legal-
publications/pages/tax-issues-in-the-2013-budget-speech.aspx [22.12.2013].
34 It does not appear this applicable to mining companies except for mining support
32 ANC Maximising the Developmental Impact of the People’s Mineral Assets: service companies.
State Intervention in the Minerals Sector (SIMS) Policy Discussion Document 35 Ivory Coast plans 19 pct windfall tax on gold miners' profits Reuters 14
March 2012. September 2012.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 25

[Page 26]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Canada has, in recent years, attempted to improve the tax Such agreements have often led to public perceptions, particularly
neutrality between its mining and non-mining sectors. This includes during commodity price booms, that a fair share of rents is not
the elimination of the Mineral Exploration Tax Credit by 2015 at the being received by a country.36
federal level; phasing out of accelerated depreciation for new mine
Commercial principles
assets and a re-classification of pre-production development assets
from exploration costs to development (30% p.a. declining
While both the LOSC and IA 1994 make provision for a number of
balance). Canada presents the most complicated case study in
policy objectives and financial principles, it is important to highlight
terms of a mining tax regime, not least the variation at provincial
that the “[d]evelopment of the resources of the Area shall take
levels. Quebec announced a change to its mining tax regime in place in accordance with sound commercial principles”.37
May 2013 with a minimum mining tax on output value and a
progressive mining tax on profit. Consequently, in developing financial terms for DSM exploitation
activities, these should be both supportive of the commercial nature
Kazakhstan, together with Mongolia, is perhaps the most
of DSM development. That said, the issue of capturing profits /
significant in terms of change in 2009 with the introduction of a
rents in pursuit of social justice needs to be highlighted. There is a
new mineral extraction tax based on world pricing values (e.g.
developing societal expectancy, that beyond normal commercial
copper 5.7%) and a progressive excess profit tax ranging from 0%
rates of return, any “supernormal” profits should be shared with a
to 60%; the latter commences when net income exceeds 25% of
resource owner. However, this needs to be seen in the context of a
deductions (including capital items). That said the CIT rate remains
fair and equitable system.
relatively low in Kazakhstan.
Discussion will be made later, however, about the merits of a
The above are a sample of major changes. They serve to
“safety valve” to capture or kick-in during periods of high
demonstrate this state of flux and instability in land-based mining
commodity prices.
regimes.
Fiscal stability agreements
While countries like Chile and Peru have adopted relatively recent
additional profit style royalties, it would appear that most mining
36 Guj P, Bocoum B, Limerick J, Meaton M & Maybee B How to Improve Mining
ventures in these countries still operate under fiscal stabilization Tax Administration and Collection Frameworks: A Sourcebook World Bank, April
2013 at xii.
agreements and thus not subject to the new regimes.
37 IA 1994, Annex, Section 6, Production Policy.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 26

[Page 27]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
The IMF & World Bank question and focused on attempting to achieve “progressivity” and
“tax neutrality”.
Both the World Bank and IMF have been active in the EI sector,
particularly in the field of the taxation of natural resources. IMF Governments and business however, tend to focus more on tax
activity has increased significantly since the start of the Topical rates, revenues generated, profitability rather than this
Trust Fund on Managing Natural Resource Wealth in 2010.38 economically pure notion of tax neutrality. For example the IMF and
World Bank advocate a progressive system – it’s not perfect, but it
The non-renewable nature of mineral resources
is a start. Precept 3 of The Natural Resource Charter states that
“[w]ell-designed fiscal regimes should allow the government to
Opinion is divided on whether a premium should be attached to the
share in profitability and to have some minimum revenue stream in
non-renewable nature of mineral resources. Some consider this
premium or value to be negligible;39 while others consider that a all production periods”.
“depletion premium” should be reflected.40 This is currently a
Mechanisms to achieve optimal revenues have been bolted on to
theoretical debate and is not of particular significance for this
existing structures – or undermined by complexity, overly generous
exercise but simply raises the issue that market pricing does not
incentives, fiscal stability arrangements (bargaining power and
reflect such a value, neither does it necessarily reflect
negotiations) to encourage investment and naturally uncertainty
environmental impacts.
over future metal pricing and production costs. In a DSM
environment this is compounded by the fact that we know little
Concluding remarks
about the economic behaviour of contractors under a DSM regime.
Is there an optimal tax rate? No person has yet determined the
appropriate (optimal) level of taxation for the mining sector.41 There ultimately needs to be a balance – and a longer term
consideration. High, front ended taxes may raise short term
Indeed economists appear to have avoided an answer to this
revenues but over the longer term will likely discourage investment.
That leads, at least in theory, to a lower tax base. There may be
unique characteristics associated with DSM and access to / supply
38 See http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/key/ttf.htm.
39 Otto J et al Mining royalties: a global study of their impact on investors, of strategic minerals which counters that theory.
government, and civil society The World Bank (2006) at 29.
40 Stevens et al Conflict and Coexistence in the Extractive Industries A Chatham
There is, albeit small beginnings, a shift occurring in fiscal models
House Report, November 2013 at 42.
41 In the case of Mali, the IMF determined an optimal royalty rate of 3.5% and a with a move from distortionary taxation in the form of royalties
profit tax of 35%. See Thomas S “Mining Taxation: An Application to Mali” IMF
toward a rent (profit)-based model. But this model is not of
Working Paper, WP/10/126, May 2010.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 27

[Page 28]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
universal appeal to the industry – and it does have many to address changes in the DSM sector as the industry evolves
weaknesses as this WP will highlight. through the investment and learning processes.
In 2012, the Fiscal Affairs Department of the IMF issued a Board ISA TS11 has already presented an overview of possible options
Paper on the Taxation of Natural Resource Rents42 seeking input including an economic rent to capture surplus (windfall) revenues
from stakeholders on a number of questions related to the taxation together royalties including a royalty as an environmental tax.
of extractive industries. These included the appropriate mix
But one of that report’s summary observations is that “….the
between royalty-based and rent-based models and their associated
current mining industry model may not be totally appropriate”.
administration mechanisms. In this regard, Rio Tinto’s submission
There is perhaps need ultimately for some innovative, creative and
concluded that there should be greater focus on taxes that are
lateral thinking here, including consideration of methodologies
simpler to collect than on those considered “theoretically pure” such
applied to the petroleum industry.
as rent resource taxes.
While there has been an upward trend in levies payable by the
The IMF generally advocates a three-tier approach: a royalty (3-
mining industry globally, the industry has also been subject to
5%), a corporate income tax (c.30%) and a rent-based tax. As has
special and favourable tax treatment reflecting both its perceived
been the case in its advice to developing countries, capacity-
higher risk, higher capital investment requirements compared to
building in terms of administration and collection is preferable to
other industry sectors – and individual government policy positions
putting in place a fiscal system that is suboptimal in terms of its
with regard to attracting investment capital inflows and mining
effectiveness. In terms of capacity, an auctioning process would
dependent GDPs. The current mining industry model has a shelf-
front end fiscal payments whereas a rent tax would back end fiscal
life.
payments but require greater technical input.
Ultimately, any tax policy should support the three pillars of
There will need to be trade-offs. In designing the optimal fiscal
sustainable development and in the case of the ISA, the CHM
regime for the ISA there will be a degree of complexity in
principle. Consequently, three objectives emerge under a 21st
compliance and administration costs. There is also the trade-off
century tax policy:
between flexibility and certainty. The regime needs to allow for
change and thus be flexible; however, certainty (and thus stability)
1. The levying and collection of a regular tax across all sectors of
is also an important feature. However, a stable regime also needs
an economy to promote economic growth and development;
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 28

[Page 29]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
2. A share in the rents earned through mineral extraction as
compensation to the owner of the mineral resources; and
3. A policy which mitigates or compensates for any serious
damage to the environmental base, particularly the loss of
ecosystem services.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 29

[Page 30]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
5. Policy objectives & financial principles
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 30

[Page 31]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Objective: This section of the WP aims to capture all the policy objectives and financial principles relevant to DSM financial terms.
The IA 1994 made fundamental changes to the provisions of the LOSC. As to financial terms, it created a number of guiding principles that
need to be considered in the design of the financial mechanism and its underlying terms. That said, a number of policy objectives are retained
in the LOSC and these are also detailed below.
The financial regime will need to be developed, assessed and ultimately defended against the underlying design criteria.
Aside from the policy and financial objectives discussed in the next section, there are also a number of broad principles that should be applied
when designing a fiscal regime / policy. These are presented in the table below.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 31

[Page 32]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
The following table identifies the general (best practice) principles in designing a fiscal regime. They both support and complement the
objectives and principles contained in the LOSC and IA 1994.
1 •This is the capacity of the tax base to achieve its objectives – generate revenues and desired
Effectiveness
economic outcome.
2
Equity •Equivalent treatment of taxpayers and fair allocation of the tax base.
3
•Neutral as to investment decisions. Greater risk borne by the party able to bear it
Efficiency .
•Lower administration and compliance costs. Certainty for business planning. The need to
4
minimise avoidance of fiscal obligations. Transparency dictates the need for standard terms,
Simplicity, transparency and certainty
disclosure of any non-standard application and non-discrimination.
5 •Same commercial transactions should have same tax consequences. See this as key; fiscal
Coherence & consistency
treatment needs to follow commercial process.
6
.
Flexibility •Adapts to change in market conditions
7
Enforeability •Easy to enforce.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 32

[Page 33]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Policy objectives and financial principles
The objectives and principles are of fundamental importance in both the direction of the fiscal regime project, its subsequent defence and
monitoring to ensure objectives are met and principles adhered to.
The following table summarises the policy objectives contained in the LOSC43.
Policy Objective Comment
1. Optimum revenues from proceeds of
This sub-paragraph places a clear guiding objective on the ISA in developing and
commercial production [LOSC Annex III, article
negotiating financial terms to ensure that revenues from commercial production are
13(1)(a)].
optimised. That is, any system must be effective and in a DSM perspective realise
the CHM principle and objective. Optimum revenues are “best possible” revenues - a
fair return as owner of the mineral resources.
There must be a level of assured income to the ISA – at least over a longer term
perspective given the levels of uncertainty over DSM and the nature of mining risk
generally (high levels of capital investment, commodity price cycles, unique features
of DSM etc.).
2. To attract investments and technology [LOSC
Under this sub-paragraph any financial regime must seek to entice capital
Annex III, article 13(1)(b)].
investment and technology to the development (exploration and exploitation) of the
Area.
Though no artificial advantage or disadvantage must be afforded to deep sea miners
(see below), the ISA regime must remain “competitive”. Simply, a draconian regime
will discourage investment; a soft regime will undermine the CHM principle and
impact the optimum revenue object above. Financial capital is mobile;44 States will
continue to adjust their own terrestrial fiscal regimes to encourage inward
investment. Consequently, the need for the ISA regime to operate on commercial
43 IA 1994 Annex Sec 8(2) removed application of LOSC, Annex III article 13(3)-(10) only.
44 The allocation of investment capital within (large miners) and access to capital in the markets (small miners) is considered the No. 1 risk for the mining industry. See EY
Business risks facing mining and metals 2013-2014 (2013).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 33

[Page 34]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
terms and principles is fundamental.
3. Equal treatment and comparable financial
This may prove challenging where a number of different contractor entities are
obligations for contractors [LOSC Annex III,
engaged in the DSM process with potentially differing financial objectives, goals and
article 13(1)(c)].
desired financial returns. However, the principle is an important one under the
general principle of equity.
4. Incentives to undertake JVs with Enterprise
This can be given due consideration under the Incentives section of this Working
and developing States / stimulate technology
Paper. The sub-paragraph also advocates that the incentives are provided on a
transfer & training [LOSC Annex III, article
“uniform and non-discriminatory” basis.
13(1)(d)].
5. Enable the Enterprise to engage in DSM
This Working Paper has not considered the specific aspects applying to the
effectively at the same time [LOSC Annex III,
Enterprise but clearly the financial terms should not prejudice the operation of the
article 13(1)(e]
Enterprise nor assumingly create an artificial advantage for the Enterprise and its JV
contractors.
6. Financial incentives not to subsidise
Annex III Article 13(14) permits the ISA (adopting RRPs) to provide incentives to
contractors leading to artificial competitive
contractors on a “uniform and non-discriminatory basis” – based on
advantage [LOSC Annex III, article 13(1)(f)].
recommendations of the LTC. Uniform does not necessarily mean that new contracts
should be exactly the same as old ones; any incentives should reflect current
conditions, including prevailing economic conditions and contemporary best practice.
This objective also applies to any revision in a contract.45 That is, any revision may
be by way of an incentive(s) and clearly this should not lead to an artificial
competitive advantage.
45 Annex III, Article 19 states that “when circumstances have arisen or are likely to arise which, in the opinion of either party, would render the contract inequitable or make it
impracticable or impossible to achieve the objectives set out in the contract or in Part XI, the parties shall enter into negotiations to revise the contract accordingly”.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 34

[Page 35]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
The following table summarises the general financial principles contained within the 1994 IA which are to be applied in developing financial
terms. These provisions do not contain much in the way of substantive content. However, they do provide a degree of flexibility in their
interpretation and implementation, as was intended during the ad-hoc discussions relating to the IA 1994.
Policy Objective Comment
1. Fair system [IA 1994, Annex, Sec 8(1)(a)]. This sub-paragraph determines that the system of payments is to be fair both to the
ISA and the contractor; additionally, the system needs to provide an “adequate
means” to determine compliance by a contractor.
What is to be considered as “fair” is highly subjective and open to much debate.
However, in the context of terrestrial mining, it is generally accepted that a
progressive system is fairer: that is, the financial tale should increase with
profitability. In the early years, a fiscal system should have a low financial impact
allowing recovery of the investment.
Flexibility (that the system should be flexible to accommodate economic cycles and
extract rents during peak commodity pricing) together with certainty /
predictability46 and stability would also seem appropriate qualities inherent in a
fair system.
2. The rates of payment are to be “within the The main objective of this sub-paragraph is to ensure that “deep seabed miners” are
range” of prevailing rates of “same or similar” neither subject to a competitive advantage nor disadvantage. In the majority of
minerals [IA 1994, Annex, Sec 8(1)(b)]. cases, comparative rates are available for the main minerals due to be mined in the
Area, save for rare earth elements.
This sub-paragraph grants a relatively broad interpretation as regards the absolute
range of rates applicable to land-based mining. This is fortunate. While say in the
case of royalties, headline rates may appear identical (a range of 3-5% ad valorem
royalty is typical) these rates are applied to different bases: e.g. metal market
46 There clearly need to be certainty for an investor. Equally, from an ISA perspective, there needs to be some degree of predictability of revenue flows.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 35

[Page 36]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
values, gross sales, net sales, net smelter return etc). Therefore, the actual rate of
payment will vary.
Furthermore, does the phrase rates of payment apply to all tax / fiscal related
payments? Does it for example include excise duties and / or withholding taxes?
Equally, given the reference to payment, some mining entities will be subject to tax
stability agreements which will in fact reduce tax payments due. Does this need to
be accounted for?
A practical approach needs to be taken with this. There are additional taxes that
may / will be due to be paid by Contractors to States – importing / exporting duties,
Sponsoring State levies / taxes, home tax States etc. In determining an overall
return on investment, Contractors will need to factor in such amounts due.
However, the wording of the following sub-paragraph in suggesting that
consideration be given to “a royalty or royalty and profit share system” suggests a
focus on royalty rates and profit-related taxes. This WP has accordingly focused
initially on these items in assessing the range of rates of payment.
In addition, should any weighting, in determining a range of payments, be attached
to their calculation? That is, should there be a reference and weighted (by country
GDP or mine production values) basket of royalty / profit tax-related payments? This
may produce first a fairer result and secondly provide a mechanism for flexibility and
responsiveness of the system to change.
3. The payment system should: Commencement: there is no reference to a commencement date for
a. “not be complicated”; payments under the financial system. However, sub-paragraph (d) states
b. “no major administration costs”; that the annual fee is payment from commencement of commercial
c. be a royalty or royalty / profit-share production. Any royalty obligation is also likely to trigger from that date in
system combination; accordance with general practice; any profit-mechanism will be dependent
d. if an alternative system, contractors on the timing of profits (unlikely for several years).
right to chose
Not be complicated / no major administration costs: This has often been translated
[IA 1994, Annex, Sec 8(1)(c)].
as “simplistic”. However, against the backdrop of fiscal regimes, which are by their
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 36

[Page 37]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
nature complicated, albeit to varying degrees, to overly focus on these criteria could
distort the ultimate objective of maximising revenues for the ISA. A simple(r) system
(e.g. superficially a royalty-based system) may not adequately capture optimal rents
for the ISA / CHM. A more complex system may be warranted.
Complexity is a relative notion in time and space. What at first appears complex on
introduction becomes less complex, better understood and more efficiently
administered as time elapses. Stakeholders adapt. What may appear complicated at
the outset will, after the passage of time, become the norm. This is not, however, to
discount the significance of administration burdens.
Accounting systems and packages are now highly sophisticated and capable of
responding to change. Accounting standards and practices internationally are
trending toward greater harmonization. This can support, at least from a Contractor
perspective a more sophisticated approach to an ISA fiscal regime.
However, the ISA is starting from a zero-base as regards collecting mechanisms,
their administration and compliance. The capacity (and appetite) of the ISA to
administer more complex systems (including profit-sharing ones) needs to be
assessed.
Finally, alternative systems may be considered. However, this potentially undermines
the desire for simplicity and no major administration costs and should be avoided.
There should, ideally be one system for all contractors.
4. Annual fixed fee from date of commercial
Set at US$1 million? What is this now? What is the purpose of this fee? How can it
production – credit against payments due [IA
be rationalised?
1994, Annex, Sec 8(1)(d)].
5. Periodic review – may change in What is contemplated in this sub-paragraph by “changing circumstances”? And how
circumstances. Non-discriminatory / often should that review be undertaken? Every 5 years? Perhaps in the early years of
contractors election [IA 1994, Annex, Sec DSM this should be more frequent as “uncertainties” become “certainties” following a
8(1)(e)]. period of test mining.
It is important to observe that this sub-paragraph applies strictly to the system of
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 37

[Page 38]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
payments rather than the rates of payments per se.
6. Dispute mechanism [IA 1994, Annex, Sec The ISA will need to draft an internal code and process in terms of how any disputes
8(1)(f)]. See also LOSC Annex III article 15 – are initially handled and processed. The need for detailed RRPs is paramount in this
binding commercial arbitration]. regard. Any ambiguity or uncertainty will lead to disputes. Many tax authorities
around the world are inspecting closely mining expenditures, particularly what
constitutes “exploration costs” which are generally deducted immediately in
calculating taxable profits.
For completeness, there are other provisions within the LOSC which are relevant to the financial terms discussion. These are highlighted in the
table below.
Other financial principles / matters Comment
1. Use of Generally Recognized Accounting A standard accounting code (chart of accounts) should be developed by the ISA. Its
Principles and the financial RRPs of the ISA complexity will be driven by the system of payments adopted.
[LOSC, Annex III article 13(11)].
Contractors are already obliged under the PN Exploration Regulations to maintain
proper books and accounts.47
Furthermore, Contractors are obliged to submit (annually) an audited statement of
“actual and direct exploration expenditures of the Contractor in carrying out the
programme of activities…Such expenditures may be claimed by the contractor as
part of the contractor’s development costs incurred prior to the commencement of
commercial production”.48
47 Annex IV, Section 9: “The Contractor shall keep a complete and proper set of books, accounts and financial records, consistent with internationally accepted accounting
principles. Such books, accounts and financial records shall include information which will fully disclose the actual and direct expenditures for exploration and such other
information as will facilitate an effective audit of such expenditures”.
48 Annex IV, Section 10.2(c). A similar provision is provided in respect of prospecting expenditures: see Regulation 6(1).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 38

[Page 39]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Additionally, in 2009, the LTC issued some guidance in connection with the financial
reporting obligations of Contractors relating to exploration expenditure in particular,
not least in determining “actual and direct exploration activities”.49 Specifically:
 Contractors are recommended to adopt IFRS accounting standards;
 Exploration costs must be those falling under the list of activities defining exploration
in the PN Exploration Regulations (Regulation 1(3)(b));
 Direct expenditure: incurred directly in connection with the exploration work that has
been undertaken in accordance with the programme of work in the contract;
 Actual expenditure = reported expenditure – actually incurred, not notional,
estimated or projected;
 A list of recommended expenditure categories broken down into operational
expenditure, capital expenditure, staffing & personnel costs and overhead costs.
In 2013, concern was expressed by the LTC that there was only partial compliance
with the detailed financial reporting requirements.50 Clearly, if a payment mechanism
is adopted which reflects and incorporates the specific treatment / claim for
exploration expenditure, it is in the interests of Contractors to adhere to this
requirement / recommendation which reflects best practice.
2. Payments in freely convertible currencies or A preference here would be for a single reporting / payment currency, say US
at contractor’s option, the “equivalents of dollars.
processed metals at market value” [LOSC,
As to payments in kind and processed metals, again ease of administration would
Annex III article 13(12)].
dictate a currency payment as the preferred option. There would be additional
administrative burdens and costs on the ISA to accept processed metals which would
require handling via an agent. An identical issue arises in connection with the
implementation of Article 82 LOSC.51
49 ISA Recommendations for the guidance of contractors for the reporting of actual and direct exploration expenditures as required by annex 4, section 10, of the Regulations
on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area ISBA/15/LTC/7, 25 May 2009.
50 ISBA/19/LTC/15.
51 See ISA Implementation of Article 82 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ISA Technical Study: No. 12, 2013.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 39

[Page 40]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
3. All financial obligations of the Contractor to Is this obligation still relevant? Appears to suggest inflationary adjustments? Needs
be expressed in “constant terms relative to a investigating.
base year”. [LOSC, Annex III article 13(13)]
4. Penalties: contractor’s rights may be This article also notes the benefit afforded to the Contractor of judicial remedies
suspended / terminated where following (Part XI Section 5) before the ISA executes a decision.
warnings there are “serious, persistent and
Financial obligations to the ISA should be seen as “fundamental terms”.
wilful violations of the fundamental terms of
the contract [etc.]”. In other cases or in lieu Note should be taken of the Contractor’s rights here as a penalty regime will require
of suspension / termination, monetary formulating for failure to pay monies due to the ISA / failure to make returns
penalties may be imposed – proportionate to timeously together with environmental penalties, where levied.
the seriousness of the violation [LOSC, Annex
III article 13(18)].
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 40

[Page 41]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Observations
There competing objectives and a broad range of financial principles highlighted above that are to direct the design and subsequent
implementation and operation of the financial terms regulations anticipated by the LOSC and the Agreement .
One of the main areas is the trade-off between administration and economic efficiency. A more complex system may very well deliver optimal
revenues in the longer term; but that will require investment in administrative capacity building.
At this initial stage however, and subject to the requirements of the Stakeholder Survey / Questionnaire, two fundamental objectives /
deliverables are present. First, a payment mechanism or system (royalties or royalty & profit-share combination – or an alternative system).
Secondly, determining the rates of payments. The latter will be determined through a comparative analysis – though detailed financial
modelling will be required.
In considering the design of the system of payments, the following (flowing from the above discussion of objectives and principles) are
considered the main features / criteria against which to assess initially an appropriate mechanism:
1. Its ability to generate optimal revenue levels (a fair return) for the CHM as owner of the resources; equally a financial regime
should ensure that any DSM development which is economically sound before applying financial terms, remains so after their
application;
2. Its equivalent treatment of contractors;
3. Its simplicity – administration – enforcement / compliance – transparency;
4. Its flexibility & responsiveness to change;
5. Its stability for investors & predictability for the ISA / CHM.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 41

[Page 42]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
6. A primer on mining taxation
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 42

[Page 43]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
This section provides LTC Members a broad overview of typical mining fiscal regimes across the globe and its constituent elements.
Though fiscal mining regimes do vary across jurisdictions and by mineral types,52 most countries adopt a combination of the following fiscal
and revenue instruments:
Additional Dividend &
Surface rentals / Corporate Environmental profits tax / Resource rent State interest Indirect taxes
administration Royalties
income tax levies & taxes surtax (e.g. a tax participation withholding and duties
fees / dead rents
windfall tax) taxes
This section provides an overview of the above elements.
Note: some of the above categories are not treated as mining taxes per se, for example mining royalties levied on price or sales. Mining
royalties that are levied on net revenues or profits are not necessarily mining royalties and may be treated as a tax charge. This can lead to
different approaches and treatments.
52 This is more noticeable for gold which is sometimes subjected to a different fiscal regime.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 43

[Page 44]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
 Surface rentals / administration fees / dead rents  Profit-based on a percentage of net income or profit measure
(more akin to a mining tax than a royalty).
Many countries levy charges to recover administration costs.53
These may be fixed annual fees, fixed amount per hectare, dead Volume and ad valorem royalties are administratively simpler to
rents in addition to other fees. TS No. 11 lists the many types of calculate. However, they are often challenged as having a distorting
fees levied.54 Typically, fees are levied at the rate of a few US$ per effect on production costs leading to, for example, high-grading –
hectare. These fees are typically deductible for CIT / RRT purposes. they raise the marginal cost of extraction. They can be regressive.
Royalties are in effect a “tax” on production rather than profit.
India for example, charges dead rents at progressive rates; INR 200
(US$ 3.19) per hectare from the 2nd year of a lease, INR 500 (US$ Royalty rates vary between 1% and 18% depending on the type of
7.98) 3rd & 4th years and INR 1000 (US$ 15.95) from the 5th year royalty and the type of mineral, the higher rate being applied to
onwards. These rates are x2, x3 and x4 for medium value minerals, profit based royalties.
high value and precious metals and stones respectively.
In the case of ad valorem royalties, the valuation point and basis
needs to be clearly defined and capable of audit.55
This WP has not considered this category of payments. However,
their consideration may be of interest, not least in terms of dead
A number of studies indicate that an ad valorem royalty in excess of
rents where production is unduly delayed and / or in determining
5% will act as both a disincentive and impact marginal mining
an annual fee under the Agreement.
operations. Consequently, some regimes apply a sliding scale which is
also linked to profitability.
 Mineral royalties
Mining or mineral royalties (production charges) are levied on / by:
Ad valorem royalties for example are generally levied on an output
 Volume (specific $ amount per tonne for bulk, typically lower
value. Under various mining regimes this may be applied to “gross
value commodities (e.g. coal and iron ore).
sales”, “gross value”, “net sales”, “mine head value”, “average
 Ad valorem, being a percentage (fixed or variable) based on
“production value”.
55 This working paper only considers ad valorem and profit-type royalties. Unit or
volume-based royalties are typically applied to lower value bulk commodities. In
53 See TS No. 11 at 30-33. the case of DSM minerals, these are higher value commodities normally subject to
54 TS No. 11 at 32. ad valorem royalties.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 44

[Page 45]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
metal prices” etc. Consequently, while a headline rate may look benchmark prices referenced to international metal prices to
similar, the calculation base can be materially different. determine a value. The aim generally is to levy a royalty on a first
arms-length market-related sale.
This calculation base varies significantly and there appears to be no
international standard. Variations in valuing ad valorem royalties As noted above, profit-based royalties may be applied to a net
are as follows: profit (being realised sales less allowable capital and operating cost
deductions) or according to calculated operating ratio.
1. The value of the metal contained in the ore at the mine mouth
Exceptionally, progressive ad valorem royalties are linked to
or mine gate;
international pricing.
2. The value of the metal at the first point of sale as a
Profit-based royalties are more complex to administer, but they are
concentrate;
generally more progressive and economically efficient depending on
the nature of allowable deductions (capital expenditure recovery,
3. The value of the metal recovered;
overhead costs, operating expenditure, financing costs, restoration
4. On gross company revenues; costs etc). These have on the whole been successfully applied in
jurisdictions such as Australia, Canada and the United States. They
5. On gross company revenues less allowable costs generally
are supported by detailed regulations and guidelines together with
transport, insurance and handling; and
the administrative capacity to handle complexities.
6. A net smelter return, adjusted for smelting and refining and
The application of a royalty is seen as good practice (from a
other related costs.
country perspective). From the public viewpoint it justifies the
extraction of the resource, gives stability to a fiscal regime and
Royalty regulations may provide for the deduction of costs (e.g.
broadens the tax base.56
transport, insurance and packaging) from say a gross sales value.
This is often referred to as a net-back approach. It can however
Where there is a CIT and / or RRT-related mechanism, there is
be difficult to administer in calculating and auditing. Often it may be
arguably no place for profit-related royalties and this adds a further
simply to levy a lower headline royalty on a gross rather than net-
back value.
56 E.g. EM Sunley, J Gottschalk & A Watson, International Monetary Fund, Fiscal
That said, with many mining multinationals, arms-length market Affairs Department Mongolia: The Fiscal Regime for Mining – A Way Forward 22
June 2010.
value sales may be difficult to determine. Often countries use
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 45

[Page 46]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
level of complexity. However, best practice dictates there is a Aside from the headline rate, investors will also be concerned about
minimum “traditional” royalty obligation in place; this provides the the calculation of the taxable base to be assessed as this affects the
assurance of a minimum revenue flow. timing of tax payments and thus cash flows.
Given that most regimes provide an income tax deduction for
The tax base
royalties paid, this effectively reduces the net amount payable to a
State. A royalty payable of say one dollar will reduce corporate tax
 CIT is based on adjusted accounting profits or taxable income,
payable by 30 cents in a jurisdiction with a 30% corporate income
being revenue less allowable tax deductions. The calculation of
tax rate.
a taxable base is a material consideration. It is subject to
detailed rules and open to tax planning schemes (tax
While there has been an upward trend in levies payable by the
avoidance):
mining industry globally, the industry has also been subject to
 Allowable costs (revenue / operating expenses): again
special and favourable tax treatment reflecting both its higher risk,
most regimes will allow for the deduction of revenue-producing
higher capital investment requirements compared to other industry
expenses including operating costs, financing costs (subject to
sectors – and individual government policy positions with regard to
limits), salaries etc. That is, those wholly and exclusively
attracting investment capital inflows and mining dependent GDPs.
incurred to produce income. Many multinational companies
 Income taxes recharge service and management fees to their subsidiary
companies offshore. These may be allowed provided they are at
All countries levy a business income tax on companies (CIT) and
an arms-length;
other business enterprises. Typical features and characteristics are:
 Allowable costs (capital items): for such a capital intensive
industry, the mining and petroleum sectors are subject to
 Generally levied at one rate in the range of 25-35% globally.
special rules regarding the deduction of feasibility costs, pre-
CIT rates have fallen since the 1980s. At that time, rates where
production exploration costs, development costs & assets,
typically 40-50% in the mining sector. Exceptionally, mining
production costs and post-production (rehabilitation / closure)
regimes are subject to higher rates of CIT and some States
costs. In many business sectors, such costs would be treated as
operate a variable income tax where the rate increases in line
with a ratio of assessable income to revenue.57 capital assets and depreciated or amortised for tax purposes
over the life of a project or economic life of an asset. In the
mining sector, special depreciation is frequently permitted to
57 E.g. Botswana, South Africa (gold) and Zambia.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 46

[Page 47]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
recognise investment risk – and also to encourage inward  Ring fencing: this prevents a mining enterprise from
capital investment.58 This does however vary by country. combining the profit and losses on all its mines to calculate its
net taxable base. Ring fencing protects that tax base. Ring
o Pre-production expenses (including exploration costs): fencing is adopted by many but not all countries. It is, however,
typically expensed for tax purposes either as incurred or trending toward being the norm and not the exception, not
at the point of production; least in developing States where best practice recommends ring
o Tax depreciation59 (or tax allowances) is generally fencing rules. It is also a feature of petroleum regimes. The
granted for capital assets used to generate revenue. Tax absence of ring-fencing can, at least in theory, encourage
depreciation rates attempt (as for accounting further mineral exploration as costs can be offset against other
depreciation) to reflect the useful economic life of an mining projects.
asset. For example, for capital expenditures incurred
during development and production, less generous
treatment is given and is more reflective of the life of an The absence of any ring-fencing provisions can both
postpone and eliminate future profits and may also be
asset (or mine) e.g. depreciation over a 3-5 year period.
discriminatory to newer investors. Best practice dictates its
In some instances this is up to 10 years (10% per year);
inclusion in a fiscal regime.
o Enhancement: a few regimes provide for enhanced or
uplifted expenses. This can be either by way of a tax
credit (e.g. some Canadian investment credits); a
percentage uplift on exploration costs deducted (e.g.  Apportionment: some costs may need to be apportioned
Argentina) or an interest factor adjustment. between different projects where, for example, plant and
machinery is shared or there is a central administration /
finance function. Costs need to be apportioned on a reasonable
The treatment of pre-production, exploration and
basis using ideally an OECD methodology (see transfer pricing).
development costs is a major consideration for the ISA
This may also be true for exploration costs. This begs the
where a profit mechanism is adopted. Their treatment
question as to how can exploration costs be apportioned to
will impact the timing of revenue flows on profit to the
CHM. specific mining projects?
58 That said, some mining investments are akin to “R&D” activities and many
countries provide tax incentives for R&D activities.
59 Other terms used: Tax allowances, capital recovery, capital allowances.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 47

[Page 48]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
 Tax adjustments: the vast majority of countries now adopt a  Interest deductibility: interest on debt is usually deductible.
self-assessment mechanism for the filing and payment of tax However, this could potentially allow for projects to be financed
obligations. Adjustments can and do arise either through entirely by debt and at excessive rates of interest on a loan
taxpayer self-declaration or on a subsequent audit. from another (generally offshore) company. To prevent this
excessive deduction, countries normally provide for a “safe-
Most tax regimes or codes will have specific anti-avoidance harbour” ratio to limit interest deduction; typically a debt:equity
provisions. Avoiding tax is not illegal per se. The aim of any ratio of 1.5:1.0 to 3.0-1.0. Above this, companies will be
such anti-avoidance mechanisms is to provide tax authorities deemed as “thinly capitalised” and interest payments over this
with legal powers to investigate and where necessary adjust amount will be denied a deduction for tax purposes.
taxpayer profits or reduce tax losses. Additionally, interest must generally be at a market-related rate;
excessive amounts may be treated as a distribution and subject
Tax planning schemes are very common in multinational to withholding taxes.
enterprises and groups. A particular focus currently is “profit
shifting” whereby groups of companies can say maximise Other areas, though not strictly part of anti-avoidance
expense (including interest) deductions (or reduce sales regulations relate to the nature of expenses deducted by
revenue) in a higher tax country and “shift” this profit to a lower taxpayers in their tax returns. For example, taxpayers may
tax country. In effect, the profit becomes segregated from the attempt to deduct expenses which are capital rather revenue in
activities that generate it. This is the area of transfer pricing. nature. The rules may not be clear. Revenue expenses are
normally deducted against income; however, capital expenses
This typically refers to non-commercial / non-arm’s length (e.g. for plant & machinery) are not deducted immediately but
intercompany prices for goods and services (so-called “transfer over a period of years. This situation is often, but not always,
pricing”) and to excessive interest deductions for inter-company caused by the poor drafting of tax regulations – which leaves a
financing (so-called “thin capitalisation” – see below). Profit position ambiguous and open to interpretation. However, where
shifting is a major area of current study.60 administrative capacity is also poor, this can result in a loss of
tax revenue to a government where such errors are not picked
up.
60 See OECD Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting, OECD Publishing
(2013). Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264202719-en (17.12.2013).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 48

[Page 49]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
 Decommissioning / rehabilitation funds: a provision made  Additional and progressive profit taxes
in a company’s accounts to reflect closure and environmental
Governments may levy an alternative income-style tax or apply an
rehabilitation costs may not be an allowable cost until the
additional or progressive tax. Progressive profit taxes apply a higher
amount has be incurred (spent). A number of regimes provide
rate of tax to higher levels of profit. Some regimes use profitability
for the setting-up of a trust fund or payment of cash
ratios (operating margins) as the trigger point, above which profits
contributions to a special account (escrow). In such instances,
are subject to tax. Such additional taxes have been introduced in
the payments will generally be allowed as a deduction.
Chile, Peru and Uruguay.
 Tax losses: some regimes (Australia, South Africa, Brazil) allow
Additional profit taxes are often referred to as “windfall taxes” in
for the indefinite carry forward of tax losses. However, it is
the mining sector as they are attempting to capture windfall profits
common place that such carry forwards are restricted on a time
during a high commodity price cycle.
basis – 5 years is short, 8-10 years typical and 20 years is at the
high end. Regimes also provide for loss carry backs in certain
 Resource Rent Tax (RRT)
instances of up to 3 years; this is often important at the end of
a mine’s life where no income is available but operating and
CIT and RRTs have some similar features such as the tax base.
decommissioning costs are incurred.
However, their point of departure is the CIT base is an accounting
one; the RRT base is one of cash flows (at least in theory).
 Capital gains: gains made on the sale of assets may be
Consequently, RRT regimes generally allow for the full expensing of
included in taxable income – or alternatively, subject to a
capital expenditures, whereas CIT regimes amortise or depreciate
separate tax rate and different treatment. Countries will for
such amounts. Under CIT, financing costs (interest) are generally
example tax the gain on the sale of any mining interest. As to
deductible but under a RRT this is replaced by an interest return
items such as plant & machinery, any gains (or proceeds) are
uplift which reflects equity and debt costs. Royalties under a CIT
generally recaptured where tax allowances have previously
are a tax deductible expense; under the RRT they are often
been claimed.
credited against a RRT liability – on the basis that they are “mining
taxes” so should be deducted to avoid any double taxation; often,
 Hedging: the treatment of hedging gains and losses varies and
in this scenario royalties are the “minimum mining tax”.
complex rules abound. Generally gains are included in taxable
income and losses often restricted.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 49

[Page 50]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
A RRT aims to capture a portion of rent over and above an RRTs are discussed in greater detail in Section 10. Suffice it to say
investor’s cost of capital (normal profit). It is based on net cash at this point that RRTs are relatively new to the mining sector and
flows; as soon as cumulative net cash flows are positive, a specified consequently there is very little experience in their long term
tax rate is applied. It is considered, at least in theory, that a RRT is impacts and return to government.
neutral to decision-making – at least compared to income and
production-related taxes. It is felt though, that a RRT can distort  State participation
exploration judgements. In the opinion of one writer, “[t]he RRT is
a high-risk measure for a government looking for a return on State participation (in terms of an equity stake) is not considered in
mineral ownership. Although the revenue could be sizeable in this WP. It is however part of the resource nationalisation debate
favourable circumstances, there is also a possibility that mineral and a number of countries have and are proposing increased
development will yield little revenue…it cannot be relied upon as a holdings in mining ventures e.g. Zambia.
major fiscal instrument”.61
 Withholding taxes & double tax relief
RRTs face particular challenges in the mining sector and these are
compounded in a DSM environment where significant uncertainty These are taxes levied on certain categories of income payable to a
prevails. There may be very long payback periods accompanied by non-resident. They include dividends (profit distributions), interest
periods of price volatility. RRTs are in effect, a fiscal holiday until all and royalties. Rates vary and may be reduced under a bi-lateral tax
expenditure and uplift (return rate) are recovered. treaty. They are generally of the order of 10-15% and higher.
However, a RRT instrument is, at least in theory economically There are numerous double tax agreements (DTAs) in place
efficient and has been successfully deployed in the oil and gas between all sovereign States in the world. Some countries have a
industry – though relative price stability has assisted this. more comprehensive treaty network than others. DTAs are
intended to mitigate tax liabilities for persons so that they obtain
Both a government and investor share in the risk in a RRT scenario. tax relief (through a tax credit or reduced amount of tax) on the
Revenues under this model are unpredictable but reflect an same source of income that may be subject to tax in two or more
opportunity to participate in above normal profits. different countries. For example, DTAs often reduce the rates of
withholding tax on dividends, interest and royalties.
61 JVM Sarma and G Naresh “Mineral Taxation around the World: Trends and
Issues” Asia Pacific Tax Bulletin January 2001 2-10 at 7.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 50

[Page 51]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Where a company incurs foreign taxes on overseas operations, any application of both additional or increased taxes and reduced
there are generally two forms of tax relief in the company’s home rates of taxation, including royalties. They are a source of great
taxing country. This will depend on the specific tax code and also controversy, not least where bargaining power has been in the
any DTA. Either the income is exempt or a credit is given for the hands of mining majors.
overseas tax paid (up to the limit of the tax on that income in the
home country). The UK and USA for example give this relief  Import, export and sales taxes
unilaterally to their residents.
In most jurisdictions, mining regimes are subject to favourable
Additionally, DTAs also promote information sharing between treatment as regards import duties, particularly on equipment.
country tax authorities and generally provide a mechanism for Some regimes exempt mining companies until production starts e.g.
dealing with tax adjustments. For example, on transfer pricing, a Liberia, Tanzania. Exports are normally exempt as well from duties
transfer pricing adjustment (say, increased profits) in one country but again there are exceptions e.g. Argentina, India. Some
will mean an adjustment (say, decreased profits) in another territories levy VAT or sales taxes but this is more of a cash flow
country. timing issue than an absolute cost.
Again, this WP has not considered WHTs as part of financial terms. Again, these taxes are not considered in this WP. That said, this is
While they do form part of taxes payable to States, they an unknown area currently and some States may levy import duties
fundamentally impact the rates of return for investors as they are & export duties where DSM activities are undertaken in areas
taxes on non-residents (thus impacting group of companies). beyond national jurisdiction but ores imported / exported through
State ports.
That said, the ISA needs to ensure through consultation that no
WHTs are levied on payments by contractors to the ISA. This is  Tax returns & payment
covered further in Section 8.
Many tax regimes now require taxpayers to file their tax returns
 Tax stability arrangements online and within a certain timeframe following the end of a tax
year. In respect of CITs, provisional tax payments made be
Some regimes will provide for tax stability agreements. Effectively,
required to be made during the tax year, with a balancing amount
these provide for a stable tax rate structure during the period of the
payable on submission of the tax return.
agreement or mining project. They prevent, at least contractually,
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 51

[Page 52]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
As to the timing of royalty returns and payments, these vary widely Nevertheless, there is a trend toward three major fiscal
but are generally on a monthly, quarterly six-monthly basis. instruments, namely royalties (ad valorem in the case of base and
precious metals), a CIT and additional profit taxes, including RRT-
 Fines & penalties style taxes.
Tax regimes will incorporate penalty & fine mechanisms for failure
to submit a return timeously, failure to make payment on time and
subsequently for any adjustments made to a tax return following
say a tax audit.
Fines & penalties will include a mixture of fixed-fee fines, interest at
a prescribed rate and penalties calculated as a percentage of the
tax due. The latter can be draconian particularly where there has
been a serious error included in a tax return.
 Remarks
It is fair to say, that income tax systems, generate the lion’s share
of mining tax revenues, followed by mineral royalty systems.
The main challenge in any comparative analysis is simply this. Any
comparison is not comparing “apples with apples”. All member
States are at different stages of economic development and their
ability to raise revenue will also be affected by the mix of
commodities mined and associated rates.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 52

[Page 53]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
7. Mining phases - typical accounting & fiscal treatments
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 53

[Page 54]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
DSM phases - Typical Accounting & Fiscal Treatments
The purpose of this section is to present an overview of the different phases of the DSM process, the general nature of activities to be conducted,
high level financial characteristics, associated typical accounting & fiscal treatment.
Activities / Mining phases: Evaluation / DSM Early Full-scale Closure & Site
Characteristics/ Transitional Pilot Development64 Commercial Commercial Re-habilitation
Prospecting /
Treatment Mining63 Production Production
exploration62
Activities  Searching,  Technical  Commencing  Collection /  As above for  Restoration /
researching and feasibility exploitation extraction & previous but rehabilitation
analyzing data  Commercial  Preparation for initial production at of mining site
 Geological, viability commercial processing of full / near full  Closure costs:
geochemical,  Testing production: nodules capacity of [removal of
geophysical extraction infrastructure  Product in estimates / infrastructure,
studies methods commissioning saleable form forecasts if any – mobile
 Environmental  Transport / & advance  Commercial collector,
baselines (PRZ / infrastructure preparation of scale production mining ship /
IRZ)  Environmental seafloor mining  Environmental support
monitoring area monitoring vessels]
 Environmental  Environmental
monitoring restoration
62 The Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area separately define “prospecting” and “exploration”.
63 Evaluation and pilot mining are not separately defined in the Regulations and are included in the definition of “exploration” (Reg 1(3)(b)).
64 DSM development is not separately defined; included as part of “exploitation” definition being the “construction and operation of mining, processing and transportation
systems, for the production and marketing of metals” (Reg 1(3)(a)).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 54

[Page 55]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Activities / Mining phases: Evaluation / DSM Early Commercial Full-scale Closure & Site
Characteristics/ Transitional Pilot Development Production Commercial Re-habilitation
Prospecting /
Treatment Mining Production
exploration
Characteristics  High risk  High costs  High capital  High operating  High revenue  Minimal or no
 High costs  Small revenue expenditure costs period revenue
 No revenue from extracted investment  Early revenues  [Lower  Mid-high
ore  Small revenue  [Small reduction operating costs] expenditure
 Environmental as testing in losses]  Economies of (obligation
guarantee continues  Long payback scale dependent)
 Environmental period starts  But equipment  Contingent
guarantee / cash replacement liabilities
contribution
Accounting  Varies between  As for  Capitalise mining  Revenue  As for previous  Additional costs
Treatment being capitalised Prospecting / equipment / recognised phase expensed
(as an intangible exploration investment. (FOB versus CIF  Impairment  Contingent
asset) versus  Likely capitalised General & terms); asset provisions liabilities to be
fully expensed65 as an asset overhead depreciation  Site disclosed
 Capitalised:  Revenues expensed commences as rehabilitation /
depreciate when generally  Depreciate over assets are made restoration
CP commences deducted from life of mine / available for use provision - best
asset cost equipment (accumulated estimate
useful life from exploration and provision needs
CP development to be assessed –
 Revenue during costs amortised based on
development using units of discounted &
phase offset production over expected future
against expected total cash flow of
development production of expenditure.
costs rather than mine; other Cost is
classified as assets: expected capitalised and
income. useful life - depreciated over
straight line useful life
basis)
 Commencement
of royalty
payments
65 See also IFRS 6 Exploration for and Evaluation of Mineral Resources.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 55

[Page 56]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Activities / Mining phases: Evaluation / DSM Early Commercial Full-scale Closure & Site
Characteristics/ Transitional Pilot Development Production Commercial Re-habilitation
Prospecting /
Treatment Mining Production
exploration
Fiscal Treatment  No revenue to  Capitalise test  Generally follows  Corporate  Additional profit  Possible terminal
assess mining accounting income tax on taxes – rent losses – c/back?
 Immediate equipment treatment but net profits resource taxes Or set-off
deduction for (plant & some States  Additional taxes may kick in on against other
pre-production machinery) allow for full & duties “supernormal” mining projects /
expenses – loss future tax write-off of profits / rents areas
c/fwd (add to depreciation at development
pool of prescribed rate costs
exploration (useful life)
costs)66 or
 Capitalise –
100% deduction
at commercial
production or
amortise over
time
 Argentina: assets: 3 years (infrastructure accelerated Yr 1: 60%)  Most fiscal
Examples of tax  Argentina –
 Australia: assets : 100% SL over asset life; regimes will not
depreciation rules 200%
 Bolivia: assets: 8 years SL permit the
 Australia: 100%
 Brazil: 100% development costs deduction of an
exploration; DB
 China: 10% SL on development costs accounting
for capex
 Canada (BC): 100% development costs; 25% DB capital assets; 30% DB dev costs after provision for
 Brazil: 100%
production rehabilitation.
exploration; 10
 USA: 70%/30% over 5 years; unit of production rule or over 10 years. Deductions will
years SL for
be either as
machinery and
costs are
equipment;
incurred or on
 Canada (BC):
payment to a
100% pre-
trust fund.
production &
 Loss c/backs are
exploration
rare.
 China: 100%
exploration costs
 US: exploration
66 This is the norm. However, in some States, such losses will be ring-fenced and only available for carry forward against future profits of the mining project / area.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 56

[Page 57]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
costs: 70%
deduction; 30%
over 5 years.67
Or capitalise and
amortise over 10
years.
Note: there is generally a difference between the calculations of the tax base under a CIT regime compared with an associated RRT mechanism. In the case of
development costs / capex, a CIT regime may allow depreciation over the life of mine or 10 years (normally the lesser of the two). Whereas under a RRT scheme,
100% of costs are deducted at the point of commercial production / when incurred.
The cut-off points between the various phases are important for accounting and tax-related purposes. The development phase will normally
commence where a decision to develop is made on the technical and commercial viability evident based on a feasibility study.
The cut-off between development and commercial production is often blurred. Indeed, development may still continue into the production phase.
Defining Commercial The LOSC68 deems commercial production “to have begun if an operator engages in sustained large-scale recovery
Production operations which yield a quantity of minerals sufficient to indicate clearly that the principal purpose is large-scale
production rather than production intended for information gathering, analysis or the testing of equipment or plant”.
It may be preferable to determine in advance, if possible, pre-determined percentages and levels of recovery to trigger
the start of commercial production. Additionally, there naturally has to a continuous production process. This is
something that should be considered for the exploitation code.69
Closure will normally be determined where nodule recovery is completed or for other reasons (e.g. recovery is no longer economically viable) and
a decision is taken to cease production.
67 Under this method, the expenses are recaptured at the production phase.
68 Annex III, Article 17(2)(g).
69 See general discussion: PWC Financial Reporting in the mining industry: International Financial Reporting Standards 6th Edition, November 2012 at 14.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 57

[Page 58]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
8. Interactions between DSM actors
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 58

[Page 59]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Interaction between DSM actors
A big unknown at this stage is the interaction of an ISA financial Secondly, Sponsoring States may impose a mineral recovery fee70
regime with that of individual State fiscal regimes – primarily of a similar to a royalty; the international legal basis for the levy of a
risk / reward share and / or double taxation. Aside from an added royalty by Sponsoring States may be questionable. However, this is
challenge of contractor entities and thus a potential disparity in dictated by the legal relationship between the Sponsoring State and
domestic treatment (company versus State enterprise), we do not its Sponsored Contractor and the sovereign power of any State to
know how States will reflect and treat the ISA fiscal regime in their raise revenue.
own domestic tax regimes. Equally, what additional levies, taxes or
Thirdly, Contractor companies may be liable to corporate income
contributions will be levied by Sponsoring and / or home country
tax on the taxable profits of DSM operations, together with any
taxing States?
other relevant taxes, for example, withholding taxes. Such
This will be of particular concern for private / commercial companies may be resident for tax purposes either in the
contractors and presents perhaps the single largest challenge in Sponsoring State and / or a home tax State. Furthermore, if ISA
devising a fair and equitable regime. financial terms are agreed at relatively “low” levels in a range, this
will result in revenue leakage from the ISA to a sponsoring or home
Contractor entities
taxing State, with the latter taxing a higher profit level in a
contractor entity. State enterprises, acting as Contractors, may not
In considering a fiscal regime, the LTC needs to be mindful of the
be subject to a tax on profits.
different legal entities and vehicles engaged in the DSM process.
This may give rise to a variety of challenges in ensuring a
Private contractors (investors) will need to know the bottom line,
consistent (and non-discriminatory) fiscal treatment and approach.
aggregate effective fiscal burden (at ISA, sponsoring State and
where applicable taxing State levels). While any State charge or
States have no international legal right per se under the LOSC to
levy does not impact the financial obligation due to the ISA per se,
levy a charge on the minerals extracted from the Area. The ISA has
it will ultimately impact effective tax rates and the internal rates of
the first right to a share in the fruits of exploitation. However, non-
ISA payment obligations will arise in a variety of ways.
First, contractors may be obliged to pay sponsorship and
70 For example see International Seabed Mineral Management Decree No. 21 of
administration fees to a Sponsoring State.
2013 (Fiji). Section 45 provides for a “Seabed mineral recovery payment fee which
will be based on the market value of the metals extracted. It will also take account
of set-up, exploration and exploitation costs.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 59

[Page 60]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
return for contractors. Consequently, it can impact the economic States may attach a premium to sourcing particular commodities,
viability of a DSM project and thus investment in the Area. wholly unrelated to commercial returns.
IRR hurdle rates in the general mining sector can vary from 12% to However, it should be assumed that normal commercial principles
25% (post tax). What the required financial rates of return are or apply.
should be in DSM is uncertain.71 Similarly, what the comparable
Much of the analysis surrounding the comparability of mining tax
rates of return to be demanded by State enterprises or States is
regimes focuses on the relationship between IRRs and effective tax
unknown.
rates (ETR). However, at this stage, any meaningful discussion of
IRRs and ETRs, from a commercial Contractors viewpoint is
academic.
Contractor entities
State Enterprises Natural or juridical persons
Many Sponsoring States are likely awaiting the financial terms to be
proposed by the ISA before deciding their own financial terms
E.g. JOGMEC, COMRA, E.g. Ocean Mineral Singapore
Ministry of Natural Pte. Ltd, UK Seabed Resources applicable to Sponsored Contractors. Catch 22.
Resources and Ltd.
Is this of particular relevance or concern for the ISA? The ISA
Environment of the
Russian Federation, needs to develop its own terms on a fair and equitable basis.
Government of India. However, any ultimate investment in the Area will also be impacted
by the financial terms, taxes or otherwise, imposed by State actors.
No income or other Resident entity say, –
It is expected that States also wish to promote DSM investment in
taxes levied by State on worldwide taxation of income
the Area. But ultimately who shares or takes what?
State enterprise? generally. CIT & withholding
taxes
This will only be resolved through an extensive consultation process
between ISA, State, mining company and industry associations.
IRR applicable? Lower IRR important driver – risk-
S
rate – LTBR? free + risk premium
Full cooperation & transparency between all actors,
No additional fees? Additional fees or levies?
including the ISA, Contractors, Sponsoring and / or
home tax States.
71 TS No. 11 at 69 noted that an additional 5-10% return over and above land-
based development.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014
60

[Page 61]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Firstly, let’s consider “who potentially takes what” in the DSM value chain. Figure
1 to the left shows simplistically total revenue derived from DSM exploitation split
Net rent to contractor into its component parts and its division between DSM actors.
TS No. 11 considered the application of economic rents to the DSM financial
"Tax" take by
Sponsoring State regime and this will be considered in further detail in the next Section. However,
the division of rents and the overall issue of fair and equitable is a complex area
Rent to ISA/CHM
and will require detailed consultation.
Risk premium return
The LOSC and IA 1994 provide the guiding objectives and principles for the ISA
financial mechanism: to determine an appropriate system, the payments of which
Risk free return
should be within a range of those prevailing in land-based mining. From an ISA
perspective this is clear. But what other third party payments will DSM
Financing costs
Contractors have to make? And what impacts will these have on financial returns?
Total revenue from
DSM exploitation Asset depreciation This should not necessarily be a concern for the ISA per se but in practice it will
be given this complex interaction, particularly at normal versus economic rent
Environmental /
rehabilitation costs levels.
“Who takes what” should be driven by the concept of risk as well, which the LOSC
Operating costs
and IA 1994 does not make reference to – though arguably this is inherent in
ISA / State Royalty / determining what is fair and equitable.
Production charges
How is risk allocated? Primarily this sits with the Contractor – capital investment
Development costs
and legal obligations. The ISA carries risk too: legal obligations (development of
RRPs) and if a payment system is based on profitability, the ISA assumes a risk
Exploration costs
that financial payments may never materialise. A Sponsoring State assumes some
risk under its “responsibility to ensure” obligation. A State taxing authority per se
Prospecting costs
carries no risk but may secure incremental revenues simply from taxing an
Figure 1: Total DSM revenue split
enterprise on its worldwide income.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 61

[Page 62]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Double taxation - Contractors payment and taxes the net amount. In scenario 2, a State tax
authority does not allow a deduction for the contribution / payment
Assuming an ISA mechanism and rates of payment is agreed, how
to the ISA (unlikely). In scenario 3, the payment to the ISA is
will any royalty and / or profit-share or related payments made to
treated as a “foreign tax” and credited against any domestic taxes
the ISA be treated for “tax” purposes under a home country taxing
payable – a tax credit mechanism. In this case there is no
regime? Will all payments to the ISA be treated as deductible and /
additional local tax to pay. Scenario 3 is preferable for a Contractor
or creditable under the relevant national regime?
but, even if payments to the ISA were treated as a “tax” under
The issue of double taxation is a highly complex area. It is also an national tax laws, in the absence of double tax agreements, State
area that is of great relevance to mining companies. Such entities tax authorities will unlikely grant unilateral relief (i.e. credit) for
will wish to ensure that any financial payments made to the ISA will such a tax.
be deductible or creditable under a host country tax regime. For
Is any payment to the ISA a “tax” in any case? The ISA is not a
example, any royalties paid to the ISA should generally be
sovereign State. Its authority is derived from the LOSC. It cannot
deductible as an expense under a home country tax regime; the tax
levy “tax(es)” per se. Much will depend on the characterisation of
treatment of other payments (e.g. an economic rent-type payment)
any payment under relevant national fiscal law.
may give rise to tax deductibility issues depending on the specific
State fiscal regime. If ISA payments are characterised as a “tax”,
such payments may not be creditable in a host country, thus giving
Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3
rise to an additional financial burden on the Contractor.
Net profit (after all 100 100 100
The LOSC and IA 1994 did not make reference any reference to royalties)
ISA share, say 40% (40) (40) (40)
rates of tax or even a fiscal regime. The language and terminology
Net profit after ISA 60 100 60
has been confined to the words “royalty”, “profit share” and in the
State tax at, say 18 30 0
now deleted financial provisions of the LOSC, “share of net 30%
Total share (ISA + 58 70 40
proceeds”. This may be deliberate to avoid any complex interaction
State)
with State tax regimes. ETR 58% 70% 40%
However, consider the following, very simple and hypothetical
Table 1: Double tax impact
example. Table 1 below shows three scenarios. In scenario 1, a
State tax authority allows a deduction for the ISA profit-share
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014
62

[Page 63]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Furthermore, from a Contractors perspective, how will States payment for ISA financial terms are prescribed. But as to rates,
calculate a tax base for DSM operating entities? Will they be subject these are to be within a range – how wide a range?
to normal business sector CIT rules? Or specific (and beneficial)
Member States potentially have conflicting interests here. On the
mining sector rules? These, after all, are designed to stimulate
one hand, a “low” rate of payment may be argued for by some
investment in a country. Or will the income be exempt in a home
States – shifts profits to a taxing State. On the other, some will
country (unlikely)? A mismatch could arise whereby States tax
argue for “higher” rates – optimal revenues for the CHM but also
normal profits earlier than under an ISA mechanism save for any
the potential to discourage investment in DSM and retain
royalty mechanism. Most jurisdictions provide for the worldwide
investment in land-based mining.
taxation of locally incorporated entities.72 It may be there are some
provisions that exempt non-local source income or activities but
Uncertainty in the DSM environment encompasses many areas. Yet,
generally this is not the case. Non-State enterprise Contractors such
the behaviour of DSM actors in an economic sense is untested.
as UK Seabed Resources Ltd, as a UK incorporated company will be
resident for CIT purposes in the UK on its worldwide income and State taxation on the ISA / CHM
gains.73
Any financial terms should provide that all payments made to the
Finally, there is the issue of transfer pricing adjustments. If any ISA should be free of any deduction, tax or otherwise, by a paying
payments made to the ISA are subsequently adjusted to market- entity. This is an important point that needs to be drawn out in
related prices or values, how will these adjustments be handled by stakeholder discussions.
a home country taxing State?
Most territories levy withholding taxes on payments such as
How to resolve / take forward? interest, royalties and profit remittances (dividends). It may be the
case in a number of tax jurisdictions that royalties, for example,
This is an area that needs to be addressed in a Stakeholder Survey
would, prima facie, be subject to a withholding tax.74
and subsequent consultation between all stakeholders. However,
the issue is principally one between the Sponsoring State and / or While there is a comprehensive set of double tax treaties between
taxing State and the Contractor. The mechanism and rates of the world’s nations to mitigate or eliminate double taxation, the
72 And / or on the basis of where the entity is managed and controlled. 74 As a general rule States levy withholding taxes on IP-related royalty payments
73 It is likely multinational companies will consider tax planning structures to e.g. film, music, patent royalties. Mining royalties are normally intra-State (paid to a
mitigate the impact of any double taxation arising. This, naturally, is outside of the government of the State where the mine is located) rather than inter-State. So, this
scope of this study. will be new ground for many States and consequently requires clarification.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014
63

[Page 64]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
treaty network with Jamaica (assuming the ISA to be an entity Some of the discussions above may seem hypothetical or abstract.
resident in Jamaica) is at best minimal. There are likely to be easy answers or solutions. However, this is
uncharted territory and all possible scenarios need to be discussed
Under a DTA or unilateral provisions, a withholding tax is generally
and consulted on as appropriate.
creditable in a receiving State or even reduced to zero where there
is a DTA.
However aside from the lack of DTAs concluded with Jamaica, the
ISA has no taxable income. Withholding taxes could be a real “cost”
for the ISA. For example, say a royalty payable to the ISA of 100 is
subject to a 30% withholding tax, the taxing State receives 30 and
the ISA / CHM 70.
Article 183(1) LOSC does provide:
“Within the scope of its official activities, the Authority, its
assets and property, its income, and its operations and
transactions, authorized by this Convention, shall be exempt
from all direct taxation and goods imported or exported for
its official use shall be exempt from all customs duties. The
Authority shall not claim exemption from taxes which are no
more than charges for services rendered”.
Consequently, there is argument that no such withholding taxes
should be levied on the ISA.75 But this should be clarified in the
Stakeholder Survey.
75 Multinationals use a variety of techniques to minimise withholding tax rates
including grossing up clauses and offshore royalty trap companies.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014
64

[Page 65]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
9. Valuation – the starting point
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 65

[Page 66]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Valuation point for DSM
This is a fundamental point and requires However, a complexity of administration For example, the original LOSC financial
an explicit definition in the PN exploitation arises potentially in determining a value at provisions, provided for a royalty based on
regulations. It is the point at which a value the ideal valuation point, being the mine- the market value of the processed
needs to be determined for say royalty head value. No sales will occur at this metals.78
calculation purposes – and, in the case of point.
As a rule of thumb, other things being
any profit-related mechanisms, the sales
Consequently, rather than any attempt to equal (i.e. no adjustments), any royalty
revenue at a “taxing” point and the
estimate the value of the minerals at the levied further downstream stream, should
deductions allowed for activities upstream
mine head, the point of a first sale by a be progressively at a lower rate. For
of that point in calculating net profits (or
mine producer is generally taken. example, in Western Australia, a historic
losses).
royalty rate of 10% was levied at the min-
Therefore, there is need to look further
In theory, it is acknowledged that the head. This remains the benchmark today
downstream and find an effective first
valuation point needs to be at, or as as a return rate. However, this was
point of sale or transfer of the ore /
close to, the extraction point of a changed to the following: 7.5% on
concentrate / finished metal / international
resource. This point in land-based mining crushed and screened ore; 5% if sold as
reference or published price…or simply a
is referred to as the “ex-mine” or “mine concentrate and 2.5% if sold in metallic
convenient valuation point. Points closer to
head” value.76 It is the point at which form.79
the mine head are said to be “more
compensation is due to be paid to the
economically efficient and equitable”;77 Otherwise, in determining say a royalty
owner of the non-renewable resource.
that is, closer to the point being valued. base, the mine-head value can only be
Applying a standard valuation point
Those closer to the ultimate consumption determined by netting back the
provides consistency across all mining
point can be easier to administer and offer downstream costs from the valuation
projects.
greater revenue stability. point.80 This makes for more complex
Therefore, the value (the output value) of
that resource at the valuation point should
78 LOSC Annex III, Article 13(5)&(6).
exclude any value-add in downstream 79 The rates were varied so as to encourage
processing beyond that point. 77 Guj P, Bocoum B, Limerick J, Meaton M & investment in downstream processing.
Maybee B How to Improve Mining Tax 80 These can include, depending on the valuation
Administration and Collection Frameworks: A point: smelting & refining costs, sea freight,
76 Or, in an oil & gas context, the “well head” value. Sourcebook World Bank, April 2013 at 26. insurance, assay costs, packaging costs
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 66

[Page 67]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
administration. To reduce this burden, enterprise. Consequently, a reference to a considering a valuation point, account
often the free on board (FOB) arm’s length market-related price is likely required in needs to be taken of:
price81 is used at the first point of sale,82 this case. Mining regulations generally
 Mineral valuation: will the valuation
generally at the point of export from a provide for an adjustment to or
point adequately capture the fair value
country or delivery within a country. This substitution of an arms-length price.
of all minerals contained in an ore or
is effectively a gross price or value but it Again, this can add to administrative
concentrate. For example, if a
may be necessary to adjust the royalty complexity.
valuation point was taken as the sale
rate: in principle a royalty on a net-back
Figure 2 on page 70 shows the various of concentrate to a smelter, would this
basis should be higher than a gross value
upstream and downstream phases of a capture say the value of rare earth
one.83
DSM operation. metals or other minerals contained in
But what if the first point of sale is not at the ore?86
The LOSC determines that title to the
arms-length (market-related)? The latter  If a royalty say is levied on the final
minerals passes upon recovery in
will be a problem in a vertically integrated market value of the metals, how easy
accordance with the convention.84 In the
operation where all parts of the operation an administrative process will this be
case of PN exploitation, this is arguably
are ultimately part of the same business to determine a value? What, for
the point at which a collector recovers the
example, assay process and
resources from the ocean floor.85 This is,
procedures need to be followed? Do all
81 Strictly, in a land based environment there is a strictly, the point at which the ISA is
minerals expected to be extracted
Fair Market Value FOB Mine value, calculated by
seeking compensation for the value of the
deducting port and transport costs from a FMV FOB have an international reference value
port value. This latter value can be derived from a PN resource extracted, excluding the
or price?
final benchmark price for product less transport and
value-added by subsequent, downstream
costs such as insurance.  What of the impact of any hedging
82 This does not necessarily mean all royalty processes.
arrangements? Should these be
mechanisms apply a rate on this price. This will
depend on the specific regulations. Under various
A full understanding of this process and
mining regimes the base may be one on “gross 86 This may not necessarily generate credits for
sales”, “gross value”, “net sales”, “mine head value”, the potential valuation points and arms- minor metals. Penalties can be imposed if minor
“average metal prices” etc metals complicate downstream processing. See
length sales points is needed. Equally, in
83 In the case of Uruguay, the IMF recommended Buchanan D Analysis of reported actual and direct
the country adopt a gross value basis rather than exploration expenditure by contractors with the
netting back given the accounting, auditing and International Seabed Authority Imperial College
transfer pricing issues. See IMF Country Report No. 84 Annex III, Article 1. London, March 2011 at 8.
14/7, Uruguay, January 2014 at 42. 85 Though this requires confirmation.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 67

[Page 68]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
excluded, where applicable, from any of preference for determining a fair Figure 2 on page 70 identifies five possible
downstream valuation point? Arguably value:89 DSM sales / valuation points:
yes.
a. International reference prices e.g.  At the mind head (collector). However,
 If a net smelter value or similar value
LME. as in a terrestrial context, there is no
is appropriate, how transparent is the
sale of the minerals at that point;
pricing mechanism? How do / will any
b. The value of the metal in any
 The stockpile on the mining or
advance pricing terms impact the fair
concentrate by reference to an
processing vessel (just before R1 on
market value of the metals
international market price. However,
the figure);
produced?87
making assumptions regarding metal
 The first point of “export” from the
 Downstream processing: in any net recovery may prove problematic.90
Area (R1); however, will this be at an
back scenario, the impact of
arms-length? It is likely there will be
transportation costs? These could be c. The actual sales price of the metal or
different scenarios;
significant for remote high seas concentrate to a third party; this
 The first point of import (R2);
locations. Can an index be used to should ideally exclude any hedging
 [Will there be any intermediate export,
reduce administration costs?88 arrangements and should reflect the
import or local delivery points of
 Transfer pricing: the point at which actual metal price; and
relevance?]
there is a third party, arms-length sale
d. Related party pricing provided this is  Sale to a smelter / refinery (R3); but at
as opposed to a sale to a group and
on an arms-length basis according to an arm’s length?
connected enterprise.
say OECD principles. If not, a taxing  Sale of metallic products and by-
authority should have the power to products (R4).
From a royalty base (and sales revenue)
adjust.91
perspective, the following shows the order
Profit-related mechanisms
89 For information, Annexure – Useful information The discussion above focused on a
contains an overview of international reference
valuation point for royalty purposes.
pricing / markets for copper, zinc, lead and nickel.
90 Could be based on an assay for metal content? However, a similar principle applies in
See also Queensland where a metal recovery rate
calculating profit and / or rent; there
87 The impact of any arrangements, transactions or is assumed.
agreements needs to be assessed. 91 The ISA could consider advance pricing
88 For example, a Baltic Exchange index. agreements to cover this scenario.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 68

[Page 69]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
needs to be a point (the taxing point)92
which is applied close to the mine head or
extraction point. The sales revenue and Case example: New Zealand
allowable costs upstream of that point
should be the theoretical basis for
The new NZ royalty regulations determine the point of valuation as
calculating profit or rent.
“the point at which net sales revenues for each mineral product
stream are calculated”.
Under Australia’s MRRT, the taxing point is
placed after the crushing and screening of The regulations stipulate that the Minister must determine this at the
time of granting a mining permit. However, the following principles
the ore.
are to be applied:
Similarly, in the case of DSM in the Area,
- for each mineral product stream, the point of valuations
the point could be that immediately after
should ordinarily be the same as, or very close to, the point of
de-watering (initial processing). This also sale of the product to an arm’ s length purchaser;
accords with the definition of “activities in - netbacks or net forwards will not ordinarily arise or will not be
the Area” clarified by the ITLOS as being significant, although separate points of valuation may be set
up to and including this point. However, for various mineral product streams;
- the point of valuation for any other mineral [not gold] should
this boundary point may not be relevant or
ordinarily be at the first point in the mining operations where
intended. The 1994 Agreement is silent on
the mineral has attained an acceptable saleable condition.
valuation points for DSM activities in the
Area and requires clarification, as least as
regards a future profit-share mechanism.
Again however, similar sales revenue
calculation issues will arise as highlighted
above, and there may be some netting
back to arrive at the taxing point value.
92 To make a distinction from the valuation point for
say royalty purposes.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 69

[Page 70]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Figure 2: Valuation points for PN nodules / minerals
Sale at this
RRT - Sale at this
point –
“Taxing” point -
concentrate at
Point? concentrate?
“Activities in the Area” smelter? (Net
FOB / CIF
smelter
T value?
return)
R1 R3
e c
ru o s e R
N-
ro
o lf
n a e c o
p
e
(CM oli ln ei cn tg o r ) Lifter De-watering Drying ("eT xr pa on rts " p froo mrt ta ht ei o Arn ea ) Destination Port (leachR ine gf i /n sin mg e lting) Sal pe r oo df um ce t tal
Pe
D
Extraction Point =
Intrinsic Value of
Resource
Value-adding R4
processes
R2
Mine-head or ex- Sale at this Sale at this
mine value point - point – Gross
concentrate? sales values
Import / CIF of metals?
value?
Note: “Activities in the Area” and its boundary point(s) has to be defined for a number of purposes under the LOSC and the 1994
Agreement, including that for the financial payment mechanism.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 70

[Page 71]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Concluding remarks – Valuation point(s) For example, the extent to which say, the
sales base for royalty and profit / rent
The above discussion aims to flush out the
purposes can be harmonized could reduce
issues that require consideration in
administrative burdens. A separate sales
determining a valuation point for both
value for royalties and determining sales
royalty purposes and also for profit-share
revenues for a profit-related element at a
purposes. This discussion cannot be
different point will increase administrative
divorced from that of the overall effective
burdens.
and efficient mechanism but it is a
fundamental starting point, not least one That said, royalties allow for greater
of the trade-off between administrative flexibility in determining a valuation point
efficiency, economic efficiency and in the downstream process, up to and
revenue stability for the ISA. including an international reference price.
From a pure royalty perspective making The above points need to be born in mind
the valuation point as far downstream as as a review is undertaken of fiscal
possible, preferably at a market value / mechanisms in the next Section of this
international reference price is the most Working Paper.
administratively simple.93 It also avoids the
pitfalls of vertically integrated structures,
transfer pricing and netting back.
However, if a profit-related element is also
included in the final exploitation
regulations, attention needs to be given to
the overall package and aggregate
administrative burdens on all stakeholders.
93 Subject to the difficulty of a final downstream
calculation – number of minerals extracted,
available reference prices, grade etc.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 71

[Page 72]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
10. Fiscal mechanisms and financial payments
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 72

[Page 73]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Objective: the objective of this section 10 is to present an overview of the various fiscal mining regimes applicable to commercial land-based
miners including royalty, CIT and special mining taxes. At this stage a high level qualitative assessment of comparable regimes is provided
together with an overview of headline rates of payments. A more detailed discussion is made of resource rent taxes including their application
to the petroleum sector.
The previous three sections remain important considerations for the discussion below. The importance of a valuation point for determining
sales revenue; the unique tax treatment of mining expenses and capital expenditure on the tax base and the interaction of the various DSM
actors
Terminology: as highlighted earlier in this report, terminology is important. During discussions leading to the IA 1994, various phrases were
adopted in early drafts: rates of taxation, rates of financial payment. The final IA 1994 simply refers to rates of payment together with a royalty
and / or profit share mechanism. The discussion below is centred on comparable tax regimes. Even within those regimes there is inconsistency
in terminology – specifically where there is an interaction between federal and provincial levels. A royalty assessed on profits is more akin to a
mining tax than a true royalty in nature. However, mining taxes may be called royalties to avoid any complications at a federal or other level in
terms of their deductibility. This is not simply a question of semantics. It is, as noted in Section 8, a fundamental consideration for investors as
to how any payment(s) to the ISA will be treated in the home taxing State.
Which mechanism or system for payment? But have they worked? Have they resulted in a fair and
equitable system? Have they secured predictable and stable
A number of new “taxes” have been implemented across the
revenue flows for their implementers? Or have they simply
mining fiscal arena. These have ranged from a progressive
added additional administrative burden for all stakeholders?
tax, which attracts a higher tax rate at higher incremental
levels of taxable income; a sliding rate royalty which is linked These are difficult questions to answer, not least as a number
to the mineral price (though this may not take account of of systems have only been in place for a short time or many
inflationary rises over a period of years) and taxes related to regimes are at an intermediate stage in their development.
an investor’s rate of return (the so-named resource rent
That said, this Section 10 will consider some of the systems
taxes, surtaxes and additional profit taxes).
adopted and try to provide a high level overview of their
suitability to the DSM environment.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 73

[Page 74]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
It should be remembered that there is no obligation in the IA has a “simple” 5% turnover tax.96 Equally in Ghana,
1994 to adopt a specific land-based fiscal mechanism or exploration and development costs are no longer eligible for
system. The guiding principles are a royalty or royalty and accelerated depreciation under CIT rules and chargeable
profit share combination. Alternate systems may be income is now assessed on a mine-by-mine basis (ring
considered and implemented and perhaps parallels and best fencing). Despite these changes, there are a number of fiscal
practice can be drawn from the oil & gas industry. The stability agreements in place which may undermine the
petroleum sector has achieved notable success in revenue impact of the new fiscal regime. Naturally, the issue of
generation – not least through rent resource models of capacity in handling more complex tax matters was also at
taxation. issue.
A learning process This provides warning signals concerning sliding-scale models
generally and their ability to be manipulated combined with
Of equal importance here is the learning process and rationale
the application of “generous” incentives.97
flowing from the implementation of system changes. Some
regimes notably in Africa and Australia have adopted new Discussions surrounding what constitutes a “fair share”
regimes, only to abandon them in their early years. between stakeholders in the extractive industries has been
particularly acute in the Commonwealth of Australia and the
For example, Ghana adopted a sliding scale royalty (3-12%)
introduction of (and now proposed repeal of) a Mineral
applied to a base of total revenues and based on the
Resource Rent Tax. This is discussed in some detail below,
calculation of an operating ratio.94 This was abandoned as
not least the lessons learned.
companies could outlay costs and time deductions so that
higher royalty levels were not triggered.95 The country now
94 Operating ratio: (Total value of minerals less operational cost)/ x 100. At 30%
Total value of minerals
OR royalty was 3%; 30%-<70%, 3% plus 0.225 of every 1% by which the operating
ratio exceeds 30%; over 70%, 12%. 96 In 2006, a royalty of between 6% (max) and 3% (min) was introduced.
95 James Otto Resource Nationalism and Regulatory Reform RMMLF Special 97 In Ghana’s case, an 80% deduction was permitted in year 1 (now 20% each
Institute on International Mining and Oil & Gas Cartagena de Indias, Colombia April year for 5 years). Compared to some regimes, this is not considered overly-
22-24, 2013 at 27. generous.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 74

[Page 75]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Progressive
Fiscal terms rank as important investment criteria for investors
e
including the ability to predetermine a tax liability and the method k
a
and level of taxes. This does need to be seen as part of the overall t
t
n
package of the PN exploitation code. The stability of the ISA regime e Regressive
m
as a whole (risk factor) and availability of data are other important n
r
factors. It is the sum of the parts of the ISA package that e
v
potentially lowers any risk premium in an investor’s return. o G Rate of return
Equally, any future wasteful or ineffective use of ISA
financial receipts will undermine credibility of the structure. Yet, perversely, progressive mechanisms tend to be more
complex to administer – the more complex the fiscal terms
There are relatively few countries at this time that have
(and higher the rates) the greater the opportunity (and
imposed an additional profits tax. Their introduction is not
driver) for manipulation.
without controversy – and often accompanied by a withdrawal
(or threats of withdrawing) capital investments by mining The uniqueness of the mining industry
companies. Though the progressive regimes adopted by Chile
The mining industry is unique. It arguably presents investors
and Peru are exceptions.
with the opportunity to earn above-normal profits. This is
Progressive mechanisms have appeal. Profit is a factor of based on the premise that there is a finite supply of non-
three main elements: the commodity price; the grade / renewable resources. In other business sectors, the
metallurgical quality (high grade drives lower processing opportunity to create above-normal profits attracts
costs) and the distance to a market (transportation costs). competition, thus reducing rent values.98 However, the mining
Consequently, it stands to reason that systems which sector requires high levels of capital investment and price
accommodate (flexibility and responsiveness) these elements volatility and presents a riskier scenario despite finite supply.
are more favourable than traditionally regressive “pure”
royalty mechanisms.
98 Equally, the right to exploit a particular oil field or mine is an exclusive one thus
excluding competition during the exploitation process.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 75

[Page 76]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Consequently, a “high” rate of taxation may act as a lead to greater simplicity. The figure overleaf provides an
disincentive to invest in marginal operations.99 Conversely, a overview of regressive to progressive mechanisms used to tax
“high” level of incentives may encourage investment in mineral resources under land-based mining regimes.
operations providing reasonable economic rents in the short
There is an inevitable trade-off in determining the appropriate
term, but over a longer term optimal extraction is not
fiscal instrument(s). Many countries opt for production
achieved. Equally, high tax rates precipitate a change in tax
charges (royalties) to secure revenues in the early years of
behaviour as sales may be understated or costs overstated as
production. However, this conflicts with an investor
a result of transfer pricing or other tax avoidance techniques.
preference for a progressive regime based on profitability
From an administrative viewpoint, the more complex the
which, together with transparency produces a more stable
mechanism, the greater the capacity required in its policing
and credible regime. Traditional ad valorem royalties by their
and enforcement.
nature vary with price, but do not typically address unit costs
It seems under current best practice in a land-based context of production and thus impact marginal operations. As
that the ISA fiscal regime should contain profit-related observed by Otto:
mechanism with a royalty instrument. The latter provides the
“A reasonable, low royalty rate in systems that allow indefinite loss carry-
minimum payment to the ISA. It can also be linked to forward may have less effect on long-term recovery of minerals (reserves)
profitability. A second level of levies could comprise an than is popularly believed. However, although the impact of a low royalty
on reserves mined over the long term may be minimal for many mines
instrument which drives environmental objectives and
(excepting marginal mines with a bulk of their ore near the cutoff grade),
promotes best environmental practice. This is dealt with in
the threat posed by the necessity to pay substantial in rem taxes101 during
Section 11.
years when the mine is operating at a loss poses a significant threat to all
The trade-off
However, profit-related mechanisms often fly in the face of
simplicity.100 Clearly fewer taxing instruments under a regime
99 Those mine operators operating close to a financial breakeven point. 101 These are unit or value-based taxes like ad valorem-based royalties, import and
100 For the ISA this is further complicated by there being no accounting or reporting excise duties, sales taxes and VAT. This contrasts with in personam taxes which
systems in place to accommodate either a royalty or profit-share mechanism. are net revenue or net profit based, including net profit royalties.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 76

[Page 77]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. Ad valorem royalty (Value Based)
Administratively simpler
Base on realised value (NSR / FOB) or the market value of
Economically inefficient
the mineral product sold
Revenue reflects underlying commodity price
2. Profit-based royalty
Rate applied to a measure of net income or linked to Higher compliance costs
profitability Economically more efficient  Administrative complexity
Levied at project level on accounting profit Revenue less stable increases
 Revenue (ISA) stability
decreases
 Economic efficiency increases
 Opportunity (optimal tax base)
3. Hybrid royalty / tax
to share in upside increases
 Transparency challenges
Has a minimum ad valorem royalty
Minimum allows for some revenue
increases
Also has a profit / rent based tax - as below or a progressive
As for above
tax / windfall-related tax  Note: does not reflect a CIT
instrument.
4. Resource Rent Tax
(additional profits tax, surtax, rate of return tax)
Potentially significant compliance costs
Applies a % rate to a calculated economic rent
High economic efficiency (theoretically)
"Cash" rather than profit based
No stable revenue flow but potential for upside
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 77

[Page 78]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
mines that do not have cash reserves to bridge the loss-generating What is the appropriate level of taxation for the mineral
period.”102
sector?
That said, the IMF, in the case of advising on developing
Determining any optimal tax rate at this stage would involve a
country regimes, still advocates a system comprising royalties,
crystal ball. Aside from the uncertainty over future metal
the corporate income tax and a tax on rents.
pricing and production costs, we know little, if anything, about
A decision on administrative capacity the economic behaviour of contractors under a DSM regime.
Furthermore, this may be compounded by the entry of state
In reviewing models there is a clear problem. Unlike all
enterprises and the premium they may attach to a particular
States, there is no CIT system or model in place at the ISA
commodity, at least hypothetically.
that royalty and additional profit mechanisms can be “bolted”
on to.
Rates of payments?
Consequently, what is the appetite for increased staffing
Though it is perhaps premature to undertake a detailed
levels or alternatively outsourcing? There are three
discussion of comparable fiscal data, the IA 1994 does require
considerations here:
its ultimate consideration.
i. The nature of financial system requirements;
This WP has not reflected the overall, potential fiscal take in
ii. The administrative capture and processing of financial
the DSM value chain. Many studies undertaken by
data and payments; and
international bodies and States themselves have considered
iii. The technical capacity required to support a profit-
the international competitiveness of individual fiscal regimes.
based mechanism, particularly transfer pricing matters
This has included discussion centred on investor rates of
and other fiscal avoidance tools. return, effective tax rates,103 the marginal effective tax and
These, however, are not insurmountable but require analysis
royalty rate and the percentage of government take. These
in due course. They should not, it is submitted, override
optimal revenues for the ISA / CHM.
103 The IMF concluded effective tax rates in petroleum range from 65 -85% and
those in mining 45-65%. See IMF Fiscal Regimes for Extractive Industries: Design
102 Otto J et al Mining royalties : a global study of their impact on investors, and Implementation Prepared by the Fiscal Affairs Department, 15 August 2012 at
government, and civil society The World Bank (2006) at 33. 35. However, there is no detailed breakdown as to what tax types are included.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 78

[Page 79]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
are “technical” indicators which show, for investors, the production royalty, a corporate income tax and in some
impact of fiscal regimes on sector / project investment. countries, an additional profit tax to capture so-called
economic rents but more usually taxing a portion of “windfall”
This highlights another important consideration: a question of
profits.
setting an appropriate benchmark rate. For example
Western Australia’s royalty rates are designed to capture a At a high level, the overall mining sector tax burden is in a 40-
notional 10% of well-head value; the New Zealand 55 per cent effective rate range consisting of royalties (3-
government benchmarked its share at between 30 to 40% of 6%), corporate incomes taxes (25-35%) and additional profit
accounting profits.104 It would appear sensible to taxes (15-25%). There is also a relationship between these
establish such an appropriate benchmark against charges – royalties are usually deductible for CIT and APTs;
which to assess the constituent elements of the APTs may be deductible for CIT and vice-versa.
ultimate ISA regime.
The next part of this section will consider comparable
We are not quite at that stage yet. There remains the schemes and models and present an overview of the data
discussion over the interaction of other regimes which may researched, principally jurisdictions with significant land-based
well levy other taxes including say withholding taxes. mining regimes, mining minerals similar to DSM minerals.
However, the IA 1994 is arguably more simplistic at this point
in requiring a broad review of comparable rates. This WP has
limited that review to royalties, CIT rates and additional profit
tax rates across a broad range of comparable land-based
regimes.
Currently there are as many tax regimes as there are
countries. However, a “typical” regime will consist of a
104 See Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment Review of the royalty
regime for minerals Discussion Paper October 2012 at 12.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 79

[Page 80]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Building the model
Royalties, CITs and additional profit taxes are fundamentally based on accounting accrual concepts. Royalties are a charge on sales
and CITs (and additional profit taxes) are a charge on “normal profits”. For example, CIT is charged from the first dollar of profit;
an additional profit tax may be more progressive, with higher rates of tax applied at higher operating margins or are similar to a
CIT but at lower rates. But they are still a charge on the normal profit. This is distinct from RRTs which are aimed at / calculated
on cash flows after a project has reached a / its pre-determined rate of return.
CIT and Additional Profit models
Section 6 has already covered an overview of the key elements of a CIT base. Often, but not always, an APT will use a tax base
similar to the CIT base so similar issues of complexity arise with regard to the treatment of exploration, development and
production spend, transfer pricing, interest deductibility etc. From an ISA perspective there would be no reason necessarily to
operate two separate CIT and APT models. States have generally not opted to have different CIT rates for different business
sectors; consequently mining specific APTs have been introduced. That said other profit mechanisms have been adopted by
provinces under a federal system e.g. the Northern Territory in Australia, Ontario and Quebec in Canada. Other territories e.g.
British Columbia operate hybrid royalty / mining tax systems.
The Annex to this Section contains a chart at page 116, showing the range of CIT rates across the principle jurisdictions. These
range from 16% to 40% with a simple average of 27.5% and median of 28%.
Pages 112 to 115 show the profit and additional profit-based tax systems in the range of 10% to 20%. Hybrid systems in Canada
have a typical 1% to 2% minimum “royalty” and 12% to 16% mining tax. It should be remembered that these extra profit taxes
(over and above a CIT or federal tax) are normally a deductible cost in determining a CIT or federal tax base.
However, of equal significance is the tax base for many of these profit-based models. Given the special treatment generally
afforded to the mining sector, effective tax rates are often lower for a particular project. The tax benefit that can be generated by
accelerated deductions for spend is illustrated by the example overleaf:
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 80

[Page 81]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
The design of fiscal schemes influences financial decisions. While a headline (top) tax rate gives a feel for the amount of tax an enterprise will have to
pay, the timing of a tax event (when revenues are taxed, when deductions are allowed) makes a difference too when taking account of the time value of
money.
Say Enterprise A has a mining operation in Country A. Country A has a CIT of 30% on taxable mining profits.
Enterprise B has an equivalent mining operation in Country B. Again the tax rate of Country B is 30%.
Assume that Enterprise A & B have spent $1 000m on pre-production, exploration, development and production costs, including capital expenditure.
Country A allows for a 100% deduction against sales at the point of commercial production. This is called accelerated depreciation.
Country B allows for a full deduction from commercial production but this has to be depreciated (spread) over 10 years.
In both countries the nominal value of that deduction is $300m ($1 000m x 30%).
However, this does not take account of the time value of money. If Enterprises A and B set the time value (discount factor) as 15%, the present values
of the tax benefit are different:
 Enterprise A (country A) – benefit $153m
 Enterprise B (country B) – benefit $127m
 Difference $ 26m
This is not an absolute but it demonstrates the relative time-sensitivity of depreciation and accelerated deductions and their importance to mining
financials, particularly cash flows.
Note: in the case of Enterprise A, it is assumed that $750m of the $1 000m is deducted in years 5 & 6.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 81

[Page 82]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Royalties
Pages 108-1102 of the Annex to this Section 10 contains as series of tables showing royalty rates across the principle jurisdictions.
In the case of ad valorem royalties based on a realised sales amount, these range from 2% to 12%, with a middle range of 3%-
5%. As highlighted earlier in this paper, an ad valorem royalty approaching 5% is considered to be too high, at least in a land-
based mining regime.
There are a handful of countries that use an international market reference price as the royalty base for example Australia’s
Queensland, India and significantly Mongolia which also levies a high surtax with progressive price brackets.
Typically, countries will have (and should have) transfer pricing rules and regulations such that if any royalty base value is not at
an arms-length, then the price can be adjusted or benchmarked to an international reference price.
Equally, the royalty base needs to be taken into consideration. Most, but not all, are based on a gross sales or invoice value less
transportation and insurance costs. These are in effect a net back approach which attempts to value the mineral resource at the
point of extraction.
At this point mention should be made of Article 82 of the LOSC. This article concerns the payments in respect of the exploitation
of the continental shelf beyond a 200 nautical mile limit. Provision is made for this to be payable from year 6 at the rate of 1% of
value or volume of production to a maximum rate of 7% from the 12th year onwards. While there are understandably some
parallels here, the requirements of the IA 1994 requires comparability with land-based mining regimes.
Finally, progressive royalty rates should not be discounted, with a link to profitability. South Africa’s model may be of interest in
this regard.
The next section will tackle the issue of rent resource taxes, perhaps the most controversial area of a mining fiscal regime.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 82

[Page 83]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Rent resource based tax models Essentially, RRTs are targeted at trying to capture the revenue that
is in excess of the costs of production including the normal profit
RRTs are not a common feature in mining tax regimes. That said,
element. This normal profit is the minimum return on capital
elements of RRTs are found in progressive profit tax models to
invested that is sought by investors. Given the uncertainty
varying degrees.
surrounding the commerciality of DSM, economic rents may be
higher or lower than forecast. Indeed, it is not inconceivable in the
RRTs are currently in place in Kazakhstan (excess profits tax 0%-
case of some projects that little or no economic rent will be earned
60%), Liberia (surtax on income from high-yield projects at 20%),
in the long term.
Australia (Mineral Resource Rent Tax at 22.5%) and Malawi (a 10%
resource rent tax). The Cook Islands have also recently proposed a
The theory behind economic rents is that due to the nature of
RRT-style tax in respect of seabed mining in its EEZ at the rate of
mineral extraction, operators can earn “sizeable” rents; these rents
25%. The RRT mechanism has not replaced CIT mechanisms which
are in excess of required investor returns. Theoretically, a taxing
tax normal profit. The RRT is normally deductible for CIT purposes.
authority can levy a higher take on these rents without it impacting
For example, under Australia’s original proposals an aggregate tax
project investment decisions.
rate of 55% was recommended. As the CIT rate changed, the RRT
rate would change to maintain an overall contribution of 55%. Otto notes that economic rent can be split into three elements.
First, a quasi-rent, which accounts for a mine’s return on capital
The main principle behind these rent models is they aim to
and fixed costs. This is a short-term rent. Secondly, other rent,
maximise government returns over the longer term and are not as
which reflects the cyclical nature of the commodity prices. Higher
distorting as traditional profit and royalty-based models. But, no
prices, higher other rents. Again, this is a short term rent and
minimum level of revenue is assured. Hence they should not be
offsets periods of low commodity prices. It is considered that this
seen as a replacement to a royalty – and perhaps CIT-equivalent
should not be taxed. Thirdly, the pure rent reflecting higher grading
mechanism.
or a more cost efficient operation. He notes that while this pure
rent is the very one that provides an incentive for exploration, it is
Targeting rents though the RRT mechanisms cannot, in practice, be
often advocated as being the rent to be taxed.105 As he explains
done accurately, at least from an economic perspective. The
“the search for new technologies that convert uneconomic mineral
mechanisms adopted are often a best fit and in the case of
deposits into valuable ore is driven by the hope of capturing the
Australia’s MRRT, perhaps flawed due to overly generous industry
concessions (see below).
105 Otto J et al Mining royalties : a global study of their impact on investors,
government, and civil society The World Bank (2006) at 25-26.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 83

[Page 84]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
pure rent such successful innovations create”.106 Therefore, a Risk free return plus risk premium? Australia and Liberia use
portion of the pure rent should remain for future investment or this mechanism.
simply as compensation to investors for those years where no  An allowance for corporate capital (ACC): levies a rate on
normal returns were made. Consequently, from an investor net income less an allowance. The allowance is compensation to
perspective, they are not without controversy.
investors for the delay on the contribution to investment cost –
slower recognition of expenses (e.g. depreciation) and no
RRT-based mechanisms are impacted by trade-offs between their
immediate refund of losses.
administrative efficiency and their economic efficiency. That said,
where there is an existing CIT base, bolting on a RRT mechanism
One of the main challenges in a RRT mechanism is the uplift to be
is not a major headache, though some up skilling of personnel is
required.107 applied to deductions – and whether this should distinguish
between different types of expenditure. For example, should
The original financial terms proposal contained within Annex III,
exploration costs, being more “risky”, be uplifted at a higher rate
Article 13 of the LOSC constitutes a RRT (and royalty-based)
than say development and / or operating costs? Indeed, consider
mechanism based on a return on investment.
an “excessive” uplift amount: investors could delay production to
take advantage of the uplift.
There are broadly three types of rent tax models:
 A Brown tax: this taxes net cash flows at a constant rate. In Kazakhstan the uplift is 25%, Liberia 22.5% the Cook Islands
Where there is a negative cash flow, the taxing authority 20% and Malawi where a company’s rate of return exceeds 20%.108
refunds the tax value of that negative cash flow. Clearly, this
involves a taxing authority sharing the risk. However, the Commonwealth of Australia presents an interesting
 A Garnaut and Clunies Ross RRT: similar to the above, case study given its mix of tax instruments: CIT (federal), royalty
except there is no refund. Negative cash flows are carried (state/provincial) and resource rent tax.
forward for deduction in later years. The carried forward
The Australian experience
amounts are uplifted by an “amount”. What that amount is, is
controversial. Long-term government bond (risk free return)?
The Australian Minerals Resource Rent Tax package was introduced
by the Minerals Resource Rent Tax Act 2012 (MRRTA). It
106 Above at 26.
107 Opinion is divided on this. Some authors believe it is better to retain a royalty 108 In the case of one uranium mine, Kayelekera Uranium Project, this was reduced
and normal CIT regime and simply levy a higher CIT rate. to zero by agreement.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 84

[Page 85]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
established a framework to levy a MRRT liability on mining profits, deductions and a premium reflecting a zero refund from
principally bulk commodities (coal and iron ore). Companies government in the event losses could not be used.
became liable to the MRRT from 1 July 2012 at a headline rate of
The package also includes:
30%109 and effective rate of 22.5% after deducting a 25%
extraction allowance. This allowance was an attempt to capture a
 A nil liability for miner profits below A$75 million (the full MRRT
tax on the resource itself excluding any value added by the miner.
kicks in at profits over A$125 million);
That is, no taxing of the value-add in any downstream activities.
 The starting base for assets was either book value (permitted a
5 year accelerated depreciation rate)111 or market value at 1
MRRT liability = MRRT rate x (Mining profit – Mining
May 2010 (effective life);
allowances)
 Investments (capital assets and mine development) post 1 July
The MRRT was introduced following a tax review (The Henry Tax 2012 could be written-off immediately;
Review) and consultations with the mining industry. The MRRT  The transfer of MRRT losses to other coal and iron ore projects
started life as the Resource Super Profits Tax (RSPT) at a rate of in Australia, albeit the MRRT is a project-based tax.
40%. Negotiations with the mining industry led to a higher uplift
factor and accelerated depreciation of new investments. The MRRT has proved highly controversial. It has been the subject
of a High Court challenge and a Bill before the Australian Senate112
One rationale for the MRRT was that natural resources, being non-
could see the abolition of the MRRT – an election promise made by
renewable allowed for “above normal profit”110 or economic rent.
the current Abbot administration.
The model is based on the Garnaut-Clunies Ross resource rent tax
incorporating an upliftment of tax losses at a discount rate (long The Commonwealth government estimated that the MRRT would
term bond rate + 7%) to reflect the time value of any unused raise A$10.6 billion in revenue in the first 3 year period. In its first
two quarters the MRRT raised A$126 million, compared to a
Treasury forecast of A$2 billion.113
109 The Petroleum Rent Resource Tax is levied at 40%.
110 “The object of this Act is to ensure that the Australian community receives an
adequate return for its taxable resources, having regard to: (a) the inherent value
of the resources; and (b) the non-renewable nature of the resources; and (c) the
111 Year 1: 36%, Year 2: 24%, Years 3-4: 15% and Year 5: 10%.
extent to which the resources are subject to Commonwealth, State and Territory
112 Minerals Resource Rent Tax Repeal and Other Measures Bill 2013.
royalties. This Act does this by taxing above normal profits made by miners (also 113 It is notoriously difficult to estimate new taxes – zero base estimation. Its
known as economic rents) that are reasonably attributable to the resources in the
implementation was to facilitate a corporate tax rate cut and improved
form and place they were in when extracted”: Section 1-10 MRRTA. superannuation benefits.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 85

[Page 86]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
In a report to the Minerals Council of Australia, Deloitte analysed
•Mining Income
+
both the factors underlying the poor MRRT result together with an
•Operating Expenditure
estimate of the position under the original RSPT proposal.114 These -
•Capital Expenditure
are important to an understanding as to whether the MRRT is -
fundamentally flawed, a question of timing (short-termism) and / or •Royalty Allowance
-
other factors.
•Starting Base Allowance
-
Deloitte failed to see the surprise in the low revenue take given = •Resource Rent
global market conditions: a downturn in commodity pricing, lower •Effective MMRT Rate (22.5%)
x
production levels, A$ exchange rates and their impact on capital
•Gross MRRT Liability
=
expenditure.
Two of the main differences between the MMRT and RSPT was the
What lessons can be drawn from the MMRT experience?
latter would have allowed for a refund of state royalty taxes and
higher rates of depreciation. Indeed as a result of royalty refunds, i. It would appear that the valuation point is an area that requires
under the RSPT, some A$0.9m would have been refunded. There careful consideration. It may be that some downstream
has also been a trend in the state governments raising royalty rates activities have been included in the MMRT calculation base. The
as miner profits rose. issue of a valuation point is discussed Section 9 as this is of
fundamental importance in any fiscal regime.
The MMRTA provides for a “royalty allowance” in calculating the
ii. A conceptual difficulty in understanding why the royalty credit is
liability to MMRT. The calculation effectively reduces the MMRT
grossed up at the MRRT rate. Seemingly, this was a
liability by the amount of the royalty. It does this through a
consequence of consultations with the mining industry and
grossing up provision in calculating a “royalty credit” for a period:
perhaps reflects an overly generous package;
iii. The starting base for the MRRT was taken as the market value
If a miner pays a state royalty of A$22.5 million in a MRRT year,
of mining assets which would have reduced the potential tax
the royalty credit in that year is: A$22.5 / 0.225 = A$100 million.
base significantly;
iv. The application of the MRRT to iron ore and coal only, rather
than across the minerals sector as originally proposed.
114 Deloitte Economic Access The first six months of MRRT tax take – how would it
have differed under the RSPT? A report for the Minerals Council of Australia 15
April 2013.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 86

[Page 87]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
RRTs - petroleum regimes The following section provides an overview of country-specific
mechanisms operating in the oil sector.
RRTs have been more stable in the petroleum sector. It is
interesting to note from a recent IMF study115 that there is a wide One of the biggest debates is that of the uplift factor to use in
range of fiscal mechanisms under both mining and the petroleum determining RRTs. This varies and there appears to be no
sector and typical differences between the two: international best practice in determining an appropriate rate. In
some countries, long-term bond rates (as the starting point for a
 Mining: royalties are universal, whereas production sharing &
risk-free rate) may not be available or simply unreliable.117 Even so,
bonus arrangements are generally absent;
uplift rates should be reasonable, time-limited and where possible
 Petroleum: production sharing (in a wide sense) is more typical
avoided (though this negates the rationale to share the economic
(but not universal) with some bonus arrangements.
rent).
Petroleum regimes include RRTs and a form of production sharing Norway
under the guise of the “R-factor”.116 This factor (also applied to RRT
In the petroleum sector, Norway perhaps typifies a highly
mechanisms – see below) determines an increased share to an
successful rent-based model. Although the marginal (top) tax rate
authority as the ratio of a contractor’s cumulative sales to
at 78% (51% rent-based tax and 27% corporate income tax) is
cumulative costs improves. It is consequently linked to profitability.
“high”, the system provides an interesting model by both uplifting
This “R-factor” is not dissimilar to the mechanism originally expenditure thus reserving the normal return to an investor. For
proposed in the LOSC with the ISA’s share being driven by a return companies in a loss-making position, a refund of the tax value of
on investment (ROI); a higher contractor ROI driving a higher share exploration expenditure.118
of net proceeds by the ISA.
115 IMF “Fiscal Regimes for Extractive Industries: Design and Implementation” 117 The uplift rate adopted in the original LOSC mechanism was 10% (Annex III,
Prepared by the Fiscal Affairs Department, 15 August 2012 Article 13(6)(d)(i)).
116 Other forms of production sharing in the petroleum industry include the Daily 118 Thus the state underwrites private sector investment risks to an amount of 78%
Rate of Production (DROP), where a State’s share of profit increases with the together with a heavy investment in seismic data which reduces exploration risk
DROP; cumulative production from a project and a rate of return, where the share and consequently may lead to significant production revenues, albeit there are high
is linked to benchmark rates of return (in effect a form of RRT). rates of tax. Norway needs to be seen in the context of a “total package”.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 87

[Page 88]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Sales income (calculated by norm prices)
overcompensation (no industry consultation on the
Less: Operating costs (inclusive of exploration costs,
change);
indirect taxes, environmental taxes, abandonment costs)
 Norm prices: independent arms-length prices given vertically
Less: Depreciation (162/ % annually (i.e. over 6 years) of integrated petroleum structures. Set by the Petroleum Price
3
production and pipeline investments Board;
 Depreciation: an implied 6 year economic life is probably
Less: Net financial costs (based on the ratio between the
generous as most assets will be in place for more than 6 years;
ta x value of operating assets on the shelf and the average
 Uplift is based on capex investment subject to the 6-year
interest-bearing debt over the tax year)
depreciation rule. Its purpose is to ensure that ordinary returns
Less: Losses carried forward from previous years are not subject to the special RRT;
 From 2005, for loss-making companies the tax value (78%) of
Result: Ordinary tax base @ 27%
exploration costs is repaid;
 Equally, the tax value (78%) of any losses at termination are
Less: Uplift ("supplementary depreciation" - 5.5% of
also repaid;
in vestment for 4 years)
 Other unused losses carried forward with interest - (risk free +
L ess: Unused uplift carried forward from previous years 0.5%)*(1-0.28);
 The regime applies to an entity rather than ring-fenced projects.
R esult: RRT base taxed @ 51%
Features and principles behind the mechanism are:
Ireland
 A CIT of 27% on normal returns – across all business sectors;
Petroleum activities in Irish waters are subject to a CIT rate of 25%
 The RRT was introduced in 1975 – stability and credibility;
(Ireland’s normal CIT rate is 12.5%) plus from 2007, a Profit
 The regime applies to upstream activities;
Resource Rent Tax (PRRT). The PRRT varies (progressive) between
 Changes:
0% and 15% depending on a defined profit ratio.
o In 2014, the CIT rate was reduced from 28% to 27%.
The RRT was raised by 1% to 51%; The PRRT rate is determined by a profit ratio formula defined as
o From 5 May 2013, the uplift was changed from 30% to the cumulative after-tax profits on a specific field (fields being ring-
22% over 4 years. That is, from 7.5% to 5.5% each fenced for these purposes) divided by the cumulative level of
year for 4 years. Government considered 30% an
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 88

[Page 89]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
capital investment.119 The marginal tax rate therefore ranges from  There is no complication in determining any uplift factor;
25-40%.120  The PRRT is not deductible for CIT purposes.
Discussions are in place concerning an increase in the PRRT rate
Profit ratio >1.5, >3.0,
from a minimum take of 40% (for small discoveries) to 80% (for
<1.5 <3.0 <4.5 >4.5
very large commercial discoveries); that is, PRRT on a phased basis
of 15%, 35% and 55%.
PRRT 0% 5% 10% 15%
United Kingdom
The UK historically levied a Petroleum Revenue Tax on supernormal
Features and principles behind the mechanism are: profits at 50%. This has now changed. The UK levies a Ring Fence
Corporation Tax (RFCT) at 30% on oil and gas extraction activities
 The regime is generally ring-fenced (some limited relief for
in the UK and UK continental shelf together with a supplementary
losses);
charge of 32% (total marginal tax rate: 62%). The RFCT taxable
 100% allowance for exploration expenditure; treated as
base includes a 100% first year allowance for nearly all capital
incurred on day petroleum trade commences;
expenditure. Additionally, the supplementary charge can be
o But, a 25 year time limit on exploration spend;
eliminated by a field allowance for new or technically challenging
 100% deduction for development expenditure at point of
field, as defined. A Ring Fence Expenditure Supplement of 10% can
commercial production;
be applied to any unused exploration and development expenditure
 100% deduction for abandonment expenditure; carried forward 6 years (to maintain time value).122
 The benefit of this R-based rent tax121 is there is no requirement
to calculate depreciation or address the issue of financial costs; Similar to the Norwegian model, the UK applies a time to the
uplifted value rather than an indefinite carry forward.
119 Both exploration and development expenditures are 100% deductible, with the
latter being deductible on commencement of commercial production.
120 Profit ratio: <1.5: 0% RRT; >1.5 but <3.0: 5% RRT; >3.0 but <4.5: 10% RRT; >
4.5%: 15% RRT.
121 From April 2010, Israel similarly introduced an R-factor windfall RRT. At 0% levy factor increases up to a maximum of 50% (imposed when the relative levy
where the relative levy factor is less than 1.5. Once a project’s relative levy factor factor is 2.3).
reaches 1.5, the levy rate will be 20%. This rate will increase linearly as the relative 122 See https://www.gov.uk/oil-and-gas-taxation (17.12.2013).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 89

[Page 90]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Australia than this may result in a concept known as “gold-platting”. This is
where an operator will over-invest in a project as the uplift factor is
Australia levies a Petroleum Resource Rent Tax on offshore
higher than the internal rate of return. This is one of the reasons
projects. This is at a rate of 40%. Under this mechanism general
that the New Zealand government discounted adopting a RRT
expenditure is uplifted by the LTBR plus 5%; however, certain
model (the Australian RRT experience must have influenced this
exploration and rehabilitation expenditures are uplifted by LTBR
decision too). That said, ring-fencing may prevent this type of
plus 15%. In Australia, the PRRT is deductible for CIT, whereas in
behaviour.
the UK and Norway the RRT is a supplementary tax.
There is no doubt that a RRT is no more complex to administer
There are some parallels to be drawn between DSM and petroleum
than a normal CIT regime. It is however its design that is
operations. Nevertheless, it may very well be commodity price
problematic together with a proper understanding of the economic
fluctuations in the mining sector that reduces the appeal of RRTs.
behaviour of mining operators.
RRTs – concluding remarks
Should the discount rate be an enterprise’s collective discount rate,
a specific project discount rate, the risk free government rate (e.g.
The economic theory behind RRTs is inherently logical provided an
a 10 year long term bond rate) – or a rate which is simply
investor is indifferent to levels of taxation beyond their project rate
determined by consultation as being fair? But setting an Area-wide
of return. But is that realistic? Many are pushing RRTs as a solution
discount rate will favour some and perhaps penalise others – that
to windfall profits; but many are pushing against RRTs. Take
is, could this solution in effect become discriminatory and non-
Kazakhstan. The top level of taxation after a 70% return on costs
uniform in its application?
is 60%. Is that a fair share at that level of return?
Should the ISA adopt a RRT model?
Setting the uplift factors is not an easy proposition. Should this be
at a risk-free rate, a risk-free plus risk premium to reflect a
This is not an easy question to answer. In a current climate they
contractor’s rate of return? It has been suggested that mining
seem to serve little purpose compared to a fair share under an
companies (at least historically) use a 12.5% real after-tax discount
additional profit tax – perhaps progressively taxed similar to a
rate or rate of return for project evaluation.123 Setting a rate higher
Chilean model. But from certain quarters, they seem to be being
pushed as a solution for developing States. Given their
123 IMF Philippines: Reform of the Fiscal Regime for Mining and Petroleum, IMF
Country Report no. 12/219, August 2012 at 38. This rate was taken from a 1995 unpredictable nature (and that a general feature in designing a
publication. However, given the additional risk factors perceived by mining
companies in the last decade, this may have moved upwards.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 90

[Page 91]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
regime should be some predictability in revenue flows) they appear
to fail the first hurdle.
Economic modelling and analysis will assist the decision making “For non-renewable resources that are expected to generate
process enormously. But is should be remembered that even if this significant amounts of econ omic rent, a rent-based tax is the most
suitable charging mechanism, as the potential economic efficiency
will be imperfect. Price volatility and administrative imperfections
and revenue gains are likely to outweigh the higher administration
(the capacity to capture revenue) will impact the results in practice.
and compliance costs of this tax compared with output-based
A safety valve? royalties and income-based taxes.
For non-renewable resources expected to generate low rent and
Though much work and analysis is often undertaken in designing
where the administration and compliance costs are likely to outweigh
and implementing fiscal models, it is rare that the fiscal effects over
the potential efficiency and revenue gains from a rent-based tax,
the life of a mine are fully considered at the end of a mining
output-based royalties may be an appropriate charging mechanism”.
project. Distortions do arise in current mining regimes and perhaps
these multiply down the mining cycle. While consideration should
be given to any appropriate safety valve mechanism during the
course of the mining cycle, is there such a mechanism that should RRT models have much appeal from a theoretical viewpoint.
be applied at a mine closure? A mechanism that captures However, in the mining sector there is little evidence to date of their
ability to generate high revenues.
“excessive” economic rents generated during the mining project?
Naturally, the reverse scenario is there may be demand by
 Their design is difficult aimed at “true” rents;
investors for the recovery of normal losses.  Difficulty in determining tax rates and the appropriate discount /
return rates;
The following Principle has been extracted from Australia’s Future
 Possibility for manipulation / tax avoidance as complexity
Tax System, Report to the Treasurer;124 this principle remains valid increases (though the same is true for a normal CIT base);
for the ISA regime and trade-off discussions:  That said, designing progressive tax models at incremental
operating margins and tax bands is also challenging.
124 Commonwealth of Australia Australia’s Future Tax System, Report to the
Treasurer (2010) at 225.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 91

[Page 92]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Other considerations that this may be a subjective call unless pre-determined output,
for example, is agreed.
Though noted in other areas of this WP, the following points should
also be highlighted:
 “The system should not be complicated”: given the trend
toward profitability-based, profit / rent share models, this drives
 Ring fencing: it is becoming increasingly common for mining
a degree of complexity in administration and potentially
projects (contract / title areas) to be ring-fenced. In the context
additional costs (the trade-off debate). Consequently,
of the Area this seems reasonable given the expanse of contract
consideration must be given as to where administrative time
areas;
and complexity can be reduced.
 Exploration costs, development costs: if a profit-share
model is adopted, consideration will need to be given to the
The following is an initial list of some features which can
treatment of these costs for the purposes of determining the
potentially make any payment system less complicated. It
payment calculation base. It would be normal practice to deduct
should be remembered that a purely simple system will not
100% of exploration costs and to depreciate development costs
necessarily produce optimal (best) revenues for the ISA:
over +-10 years. Equally, what of brought forward exploration
spend: how will this be allocated or apportioned to contract o One scheme applies to all
areas?  No individual agreements / deals – would be
 Losses: how will losses be treated? Regimes vary but it is not discriminatory in any case
untypical to see loss carry forwards restricted to 8-10 years. o Mining code & guidelines
That said, this may be problematic where there is a ring fencing o Clear mining code regulations
mechanism; o Clear and concise supporting guidelines and instructions
 Commercial production: much, at least in financial terms, is including worked examples. Specifically valuation &
driven by the concept of commercial production. It is often a valuation points.
trigger for royalty payments and for deducting capitalised costs o Royalty rates
etc. But how much of this is driven by financial reporting o Apply the royalty rate(s) across all minerals – do not
leading to unnecessary complexity. In the context of the DSM apply different royalty rates to different mineral
regime there will be a period of test mining. But is there merit categories;
in reconsidering the relevance of defining CP for DSM? It seems
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 92

[Page 93]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
o Returns & return periods best elements taken from each model through a discussion process.
 Electronic submission of returns (excel-based) in Together with drawing out the underlying issues.
standard format;
The first example presents the original LOSC model for interest and
 On an annualised basis allowing a reasonable
comparison.
time for the completion and auditing / sign-off of
financial statements. More frequent return
periods will involve adjustments in subsequent
returns;
 Payment: once a year or payment on account
during year. Latter adds complexity (e.g. if
deferral requested) but is good practice;
 Payment: one single preferred currency
o Finance / interest costs
 Avoid wherever possible in tax base calculation.
Complicates transfer pricing issues;
 Some additional profit regimes impact before
interest so there are precedents for this.
o Web-based training sessions
 Undertake online training sessions for contractors
o Clear financial reporting structure – standard
chart of accounts
Case Studies and Examples
To complete this section there follows a number of “case studies”.
These take a high level look at a number of models in place
currently from South Africa’s progressive royalty structure to
Kazakhstan’s excess profits tax. Perhaps from these models an
appropriate model can be devised or at least best practice and / or
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 93

[Page 94]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: Original LOSC – Annex III, article 13(4)-10  ROI =
 Contractors net proceeds in year /
(now deleted) Contractor’s development cost (cum)
 Then:
Contractor choice:  Apply table of incremental ROI and ISA share
percentages to Contractor’s net proceeds
 (a) Production charge only or (b) production charge & share of net
Arm’s length provision
proceeds
No interest deduction unless ISA approved debt: equity ratio / reasonable
 (a) Production charge
interest
o From CP date
No deduction for CIT or similar payments by Contractor
o Base = average market price of metals during year
Operating losses: 2 year c/fwd / 2 year c/back
o 5% - years 1-10
Ring fenced to contract area.
o 12% - years 11 to end of CP
 (b) Production charge & ISA share
o 1st period CP – 2% production charge on market value Analysis
o 2nd period CP – 4% (unless ROI < 15%, then 2%)
The model presented by the 1982 Convention is a hybrid model
o ISA share of net proceeds (ROI = Return on investment)
 1st period CP incorporating a minimum royalty, a share of normal profit and following
payout of investment costs (with an uplift) a share in economic rents.
 ROI-0% < 10% - 35% share
 ROI-10% < 20% - 42.5% share
Pros
 ROI->20% - 50% share
 2nd period CP  The royalty rate remains within the range of royalty rates
 ROI brackets as above  The application of the rate to a market value avoids value disputes (a
 Rates: 40%, 50%, 70% 4% royalty may be at the higher end if levied on market value)
o 1st period CP / 2nd period CP
 The model ring fences to the mining contract area – best practice
 1st period: 1st period of CP; ends in year of payout; 2nd
 The model provides a reasonable depreciation rate for development
year CP then starts;
costs (though some assets may depreciate faster as great depths)
 Payout =
 Net development costs each year (gross proceeds Cons
less operating costs less development costs) +
10% until a positive cash surplus  Given the model was adopted in 1982, the ISA shares are perhaps on
o Contractor’s Development Costs = all pre-production, the high side as CIT rates for example have reduced dramatically since
exploration and development expenses including all capex that time – the second period “resource rents” may not be
pre-CP and expenditures of similar nature post CP, net of
unreasonable following the impact of the uplift
capital asset disposals
 Interest deduction: there may be an element of double counting here
o For calculating ISA net share:
given the uplift factor
 Contractors Net Proceeds= gross proceeds less
operating costs less development costs  Commercial production: this can be subjective as to when CP
(amortised) (over 10 years – i.e. no 100% commences
deduction)
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 94

[Page 95]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Analysis – LOSC (continued)
 The ROI calculation uses “contractors net proceeds” for the year; a R-
factor (payback ratio) rent tax would use cumulative net proceeds as a
ratio of cumulative outlays
 Losses carried forward time limit compared to a range is low; typically
this would be at least 8-10 years
 As with all profit based models, this model remains exposed to transfer
pricing issues
Remarks
The biggest challenge on a rent based model is the uplift factor and
whether this should be at a risk free rate (government) or industry risk-free
+ risk premium rate. As a risk free rate, the 10% applied in the LOSC
model is relatively high. Nevertheless, the model then presents an upside to
share in greater percentage of rents.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 95

[Page 96]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: Australia – Northern Territory Analysis
Corporate tax rate: 30% Royalty: 20% MRRT: 22.5% Cumulative: The NT mining sector is dominated by manganese ore mining (A$1
44.0% (ignoring MRRT) 134m 2009/10) with zinc / lead concentrates being about half of this.
The federal MRRT is applicable to iron ore and coal only.
 Base calculation as follows for accounting profit:
o + Gross realised revenue Pros
o Less: operating costs
o Less: capital recognition deduction (CRD)  The mechanism clearly recognises the “ability to pay” and appears
o Less: eligible exploration expenditure (EEE) more economically efficient;
o Less: additional deductions as approved  The base follows best practice principles in terms of the treatment
o Less: negative net value carried forward of exploration expenditure;
o = Result at 18%
 Any transfer pricing issue over interest / finance costs is removed
 Rehabilitation costs: deducted as incurred.
together with depreciation and amortisation rates. Substituted by
 Gross revenue: generally FOB arm’s length price
a CRD;
 Operating costs: incurred in relation to production unit, reasonable and
 No deduction for hedging or other forex-related losses – these are
directly attributable
business decisions unconnected with the value of the resource;
 Pre-production expenses up to 4 years prior to CP allowable
 No deduction for interest and depreciation  EEE is capped:
 No deduction for forex – related losses
Cons
 CRD
o Applies to all royalty payers;  It is a profit-based system and consequently requires higher
o Interest: 2% above 10-year bond rate (4% + 2% = 6%) administrative input but this is unavoidable;
o Applied to eligible capital expenditure  Still needs a basic depreciation schedule based on CIT model.
o Time limited by period over which depreciation is allowed for
CIT purposes: 4 years – 3 years CRD; 4-10 years, 5 years CRD;
over 10 years, 10 years CRD
 EEE: no capital purchase costs allowed / 25% restriction at pre-EEE
deduction base.
Exemption: first A$50 000
Arm’s length rules in Regulations.
Reporting: annual return / payments six-monthly
Ring fencing: calculation by individual project.
Royalty deductible for CIT.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 96

[Page 97]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: Alberta Analysis
Federal tax rate: 15% Province: 10.0% Royalty: 1% pre-payout , 12% post
payout Cumulative: 32.8%
Pros
 Provides for a minimum royalty flow but at a low level of 1% (and after
Pre-payout
capex allowances)
 1% mine mouth revenue:  From an operator’s perspective, this mechanism allows for the recovery
o Gross revenue
of potentially significant initial investment
o Less: costs incurred between mine mouth and point of sale; and
 No discussion over uplift rates – simply historic costs
o Less: an allowance for capital expenditures
Cons
Post payout
 Depending of levels of investment, it is likely that the post payout tier
 Greater of above or 12% of net revenues:
will not kick in for a period of years.
o Gross revenue
o Less: allowable exploration and development costs
o Less: allowable recovering costs;
o Less: allowable transportation & disposal costs;
o Less: allowance in respect of capital expenditure
 Payout is determined as:
o Cumulative gross revenue from month of 1st sales
o =
o Aggregate of costs and allowances claimed for:
o Exploration; development; recovering, processing, transportation ot
disposition of the metallic mineral.
Royalty amounts deductible for federal and provincial purposes.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 97

[Page 98]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: British Columbia Analysis
Federal tax rate: 15% Province: 11% Mining tax: 2 tier: 2% on net current The 13% net revenue tax is effectively a RRT model. It provides for the
proceeds and 13% on next revenues Cumulative: 35.6% deduction of all key cost and expenses, including capital costs – together
with uplift.
 2% net current proceeds:
o Gross revenue
Pros
o Less: operating expenses
o Less: contributions to reclamation fund  A minimal flow is provided for.
o 2% tax carried forward and uplifted at 125% federal bank rate until  Mining project or contract areas are ring-fenced
offset against net revenue tax  The uplifted amount (effectively 1.56%) is minimal. Consequently it is
unlikely to delay revenues unduly
 13% net revenue tax: Cons
o Net current proceeds
 The minimum 2% net current proceeds tax is subject to a significant
o Less: capital costs
number of deductions thus reducing early revenues.
o Less: exploration costs
o Less: pre-production development costs
o Less: investment allowance
o = result
o If negative, added to Cumulative Expenditure Account and carried
forward
 1st tier tax (2%) is credited against 2nd tier tax
 Mines commencing CP before 1 January 2016, uplift of 133% on capital
costs added to CEA
 Investment allowance: 125% of federal bank rate – notional interest
 Profits / losses are ring fenced.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 98

[Page 99]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: Chile Analysis
Corporate income tax rate: First category tax 18.5% (35% remittance tax The Specific Tax on Mining activities is applicable to copper producers. The
– credit first category tax) Specific Tax on Mining: 5%-34.5% (progressive) rates shown opposite apply to those operators whose annual sales value
exceeds 50 000 metric tons of fine copper. Those between 12 000 and 50
SMT
000 metric tons pay 0.5% to 4.5% on Taxable Mining Income (effective
 Operating profit margin ratio = Operating Income / x
Mining Operation Revenue rates 0.04-1.93%); those below 12 000 metric tons are exempt.
100
 Mining operation revenue = net sales revenue This SMT needs to be modelled as its progressive nature may be of
 Operating income = Mining Operation Revenue less operating costs and appeal in distributing a fair share.
other deductions as defined
Regulations need technical translation as deductions / base are
fundamental to the calculation.
 The effective tax rate is between 5% and 14% based on a look up
Despite the numerous bands of effective tax rates, a 7 page document
table. This rate is then applied to the taxable base. For example:
produced by the Chilean Authorities removes the hard work in determining
o 0% to 35% mine operating margin – 5% effective tax rate the effective tax rate and amount payable.
o Between 50% and 50.1% margin – 15.5% tax; effective rate The Specific Tax on Mining was generally well received by the mining
applied – 6.67% operators and a number of them agreed to implement the new tax
voluntarily despite having tax stability agreements in place. Though the
o > 85% - 14% effective tax rate applied
Chilean government agreed to extend these agreements by 6 years.
 SMT is deductible for CIT purposes.
As an additional profit tax in respect of copper only, the effective rate at
the highest margin is 14%. This tax certainly appears more progressive
than many other mechanisms.
Naturally, this must be balanced against a normal tax rate of 35% where
profits are fully distributed by a company to an overseas parent.
Finally, Chilean law also requires a material payout of pre-tax earnings to
employees.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 99

[Page 100]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: Cook Islands Analysis
Corporate income tax rate: 20% Royalty: 3% FOB export value (gross The Cook Islands adopted an RRT-type model in its Income Tax
value) Additional profits tax: 25% Cumulative: 40.15% Amendment Act 2014. Its application includes the territorial sea and EEZ of
the Cook Islands.
CIT:
 Exploration expenditure (excluding plant and machinery, equipment & Tonga is also introducing a mining additional profits tax on very similar
property) – 100% year incurred; terms and rates (the debt: equity ratio is higher at 2:1).
 Development expenditure (excluding P&M, equipment, property) deduct SL
Pros
lesser of life of operations and 10 years (10%);
 Environmental fund (managed jointly by contractor & Seabed Minerals  A relatively simple RRT model when compared to Australia’s MRRT;
Authority): deduct contributions as incurred (terms of fund?)
 Uses the CIT base as the starting point with a few adjustments;
 Profits / losses are ring fenced in title area. Losses at end of life can be
 Reasonable treatment for exploration expenditure and development
transferred to another title area.
expenditure – in line with international norms;
APT
 Title or contract areas are ring-fenced.
 25% on positive cash balance as follows:
Cons
o + CIT taxable income base
o Less: total capital expenditure
 The uplift factor is untried and untested. It is an attempt to
o Less: development expenditure
approximate a rate of return over and above which any economic rent
o Less: tax paid or payable on assessable income*
is taxed;
o Less: negative balance brought forward from previous
 There is no time limit applied to the uplift. See for example Norway and
year**
o Add: depreciation for P&M etc and development the UK where an uplift is restricted in time;
expenditure  The model has yet to be tried and tested. APT revenues less certain
o Add: interest deducted; than CIT revenues due to deductions and uplift amount;
o Add: deduction for financial instruments / forex hedges  CIT base still needs auditing from a transfer pricing perspective
o Add: excess CIT losses (revenue, costs and interest charges). Also, asset categories require
o = Positive or negative cash balance
allocated depreciation rates.
 *CIT deductible for APT Remark
 **Uplifted by 120%. Repeated until cash balance is positive
A RRT model is intended to permit the recovery of all expenditures and a predefined
Payable in two instalments return target (in the above case 20%). However, given the principle here is for
Arm’s length - general rule in Act. government to take a “high” share in economic rents beyond this point (for the risk
Thin capitalisation ratio: 1.5:1 (excess interest denied) taken) 25% seems low. That said, the government is already sharing in 20%
Royalty deductible for CIT. “normal profit”.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 100

[Page 101]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: Kazakhstan Analysis
Federal tax rate: 20% Mineral extraction tax: 2.5% - 18.5% Excess The country introduced a new tax code in 2009. This reduced the CIT rate
profits tax: 0-60% substantially from 30% to 20%. The minerals extraction tax was the main
tax introduced to compensate for the reduction in the CIT rate.
 Mineral extraction tax Interestingly, the regime provides for a commercial discovery bonus
o Based on average exchange price of extracted minerals: which is equivalent to 0.1% of the value of proven reserves.
o Copper – 5.7%; Zinc – 7%; gold/silver – 5%; nickel – 6%;
Pros
manganese – 2.5%.
 A high upfront flow is possible given the royalty rates and calculation
 Excess profits tax
base; the use of exchange / international pricing avoids transfer pricing
o The EPT is progressive (R-factor) and applies to both minerals and
issues
oil & gas regimes
 Mining project or contract areas are ring-fenced
o It applies progressive rates of tax on a portion of net income that
 Complementary treatment of EPT under petroleum and mining regimes
exceeds 25% of deductions (ratio of aggregate annual income to
deductions)
Cons
 less than or equal to 1.25 – 0%
 from 1.25 to 1.3 the portion of net income corresponding  The royalty rates (except for manganese) are at the higher end of the
to the value from 1.25 to 1.3 – 10% range of royalty rates not least as they are based on reference prices
 1.3 to 1.4 – 20% + amount of tax at 10%  From a pure RRT perspective there appears to be no uplift on
 1.4 to 1.5 – 30% + amount of tax at 10 & 20% expenditure
 1.5 to 1.6 – 40% + amount of tax at 10, 20 & 30%
 1.6 to 1.7 – 50% + amount of tax at 10-40%
 Above 1.7 – 60% + amount of tax at 10-50%
o The expenditure allowed is the same as for the CIT base plus
accelerated depreciation deductions for capex
 The EPT is an incremental tax and is not deductible for CIT purposes.
 Ring-fencing: contracts are ring fenced. The boundary point is after
extraction and initial processing.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 101

[Page 102]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: Mongolia Analysis
Corporate income tax rate: 25% Royalty: 5% total sales value (international The royalty surtax is principally aimed to encourage local beneficiation.
market pricing) Royalty surtax: varies; lower on metal product
Pros
Royalty surtax:
 Clear reference to international pricing.
 Copper (tonne)
o Ore: $0-5000 – 0%; $5000-6000 (22%); $6000-7000 (24%); 7000- Cons
8000 (26%); 8000-9000 (28%); 9000 and above (30%). Royalty
 Price brackets are not indexed for inflation;
surtax for concentrate is at 50% of ore rates. For product, rates are
 As a royalty mechanism it is not progressive. It does not take account
0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5% respectively
of the costs of production nor arguably does it capture optimal
o So, at a current price of US$7 095.00, copper concentrate would
revenues during price spikes as a rent theoretically would.
attract a royalty surtax of 13%.
 Zinc (tonne)
o Ore: $0-1500 (0%); $1500-2000 (1%); $2000-2500 (2%); 2500-
3000 (3%); 3000-3500 (4%); 3500 and above (5%). Royalty surtax
for concentrate 0, 0.8, 1.6, 2.4, 3.2 and 4% respectively. Royalty
surtax for product is at 50% of concentrate rates.
 Rare earth elements (Kg)
o Ore: $0-10 - 0%; $10-20 - 1%; $20 - 30 -2%; 30-40 (3%); 40-50 -
4%; 50 and above (5%). Royalty surtax for concentrate 0, 0.9, 1.8,
2.7, 3.6 and 4.5% respectively.
Royalty deductible for CIT.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 102

[Page 103]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: New Zealand Analysis
Corporate tax rate: 28% Royalty: higher of ad valorem royalty of 2% net New Zealand undertook a review of its Crown Minerals Act in 1991. The
sales and an accounting profits royalty of 10% accounting profits. government decided not to pursue a resource-rent royalty given their
Cumulative: 38%. administrative complexity. Clear and concise regulations covering point of
valuation, categories of expenditure, net backs and net forwards to calculate
net sales revenues, exclusion of hedging gains and losses.
 Calculation as follows for accounting profits:
Defines a maximum area over which exploration costs can be drawn. The
o Net sales revenues (same as for 2% ad valorem)
original proposals included a clawback of exploration costs but this appears
o Less: pre-production/exploration costs (deduct value of
not to have been adopted.
minerals)
o Less: development costs Point of valuation: determined by Minister at time of granting permit. Option
o Less: production costs for ISA where “complicated” downstream processing? Would necessitate
o Less: indirect costs (e.g. general admin directly related) individual agreements and royalty rates – potentially discriminatory.
o Less: restoration costs incurred
Pros
o Less: depreciation
o Add: revenue from tangible asset sales  The NZ mechanism is relatively straightforward and with clearly
o Less: operating losses carried forward defined and concise regulations and legislation it presents a
o = Result at 10% or loss c/fwd
workable mechanism;
 It also provides a mechanism for treating for the final accounting
 Final accounting profits:
period;
o Determine ongoing monitoring costs, unclaimed restoration
 It ignores interest costs and there is no deduction for CIT.
costs less capital proceeds then divide over each reporting
period of life of mining permit. Cons
 The model is accounting / accruals based rather than a cash flow
Arm’s length rules in Regulations. model. That said, the APT is not attempting to be a RRT charge;
Reporting: annual return / payments (detailed contents of return in  There is additional administrative complexity in terms of providing
regulations) depreciation rates;
Ring fencing as calculation by mining permit and losses must be  The model is still subject to transfer pricing manipulation – but
carried forward i.e. not available for offset elsewhere. any profit or rent-based will suffer from this.
Royalty deductible for CIT.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 103

[Page 104]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case example: Peru Analysis
Corporate income tax rate: 30% 2-tier: Mining royalty: 1%-12% and Special Peru replaced its royalty mechanism based on gross mineral sales in 2011:
Mining Tax: 2% to 8.4% Cumulative: 44.28%
1% on the first US$60m of sales, 2% next US$60m and 3% greater than
Mining royalty: $120m.
 Operating profit = sales less cost of sales The tax was well received – given its progressive nature.
 Cost of sales is according to accounting rules
 Exploration spend is amortised over the life of a mine
 Operating margin % then drives mining royalty (this is an incremental Pros
calculation at each level of operating margin)
 The progressive nature of this model like Chile is appealing under
o 0% to 10% margin - 1.0% x operating profit in quarter progressivity best practice.
o 10% to 15% - 1.75%  Given the nature of the royalty calculation a minimum level of 1% sales
o 20% -25% - 3.25% will always be payable
o 25%-30% - 4.00%
o …….75% to 80% - 11.50%
o More than 80% - 12%
Regulations need technical translation as deductions / base are
fundamental to the calculation. That said, it appears that the base
Special mining tax: is calculated without reference to accelerated depreciation but tax
rates are modest.
o The base is calculated in a similar way to the royalty base
o Certain deductions are not however allowed
o The rates 2.0%-8.4% are then applied incrementally to
 Both royalty and SMT are deductible for CIT
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 104

[Page 105]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: Quebec – new proposed regime Analysis
Federal tax rate: 15% Province: 11.9% Minimum mining tax / mining tax Federal level:
on profit: greater of 1%/4% output value and 16%-28% on profit Effective:
 all exploration / pre-production expenses are pooled (CCEE –
38.6% (low margin) to 42.4% (high margin)
cumulative Canadian Exploration Expense) – 100% deduction;
Current rate: 16%. New mechanism is effectively an additional profits tax.
 all development expenses pooled (CDE) and subject to 30%
Minimum mining tax: deduction of unclaimed balance
 Capital cost allowance for asset classes – generally 25%
 1% of the output value at the mine shaft head below C$80m; 4% on the
(depreciation) on pool
excess value over C$80m. Output value not less than 10% gross value of
annual output (by mine).  [historic resource allowance of 25% of profits repealed]
 Output value = Gross value less processing, handling, transportation,  royalties and mining taxes at provincial levels are deductible from
general and administration expenses, depreciation and a processing income base;
allowance.  qualifying environmental trust: deductible in year made
Mining tax on profit
Provincial levels
 0% - 35% profit margin – 16%
 bases (taxable income) similar but some provinces provide
 35% - 50% profit margin – 22%
accelerated deductions or enhanced deductions. E.g. on plant and
 50% - 100% profit margin – 28%
machinery, British Columbia has a super-allowance of 133%.
 Profit margin = Operator’s mining profit/
total of gross value of annual output for all the mines it operates
Pros
Profit base
 Gross revenue less operating expenses  Provides a minimum flow of income from production. Minimum tax also
o 100% CCEE & CDE deduction (CDE amended? 30%?) subject to a floor;
o [Additional exploration allowance abolished]  Seeks to tax at the point of extraction; minimum tax is based on a net
o No interest deduction output value after costs;
Refund by Quebec government of tax losses  Additional profit tax kicks in at 35% which is relatively high from an
operators perspective;
“Royalty” deductible for federal and provincial tax base.
 No interest deduction.
Cons
 Transfer pricing aspects of the mechanism.
 Administrative issues – more complex including effective netting back
on minimum mining tax calculation
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 105

[Page 106]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Case study: South Africa Analysis
Corporate tax rate: 28% Royalty: 7% (max) Cumulative: 33.04%
The RSA royalty structure appears logical and is sensibly connected
SA adopted a mineral royalty structure in 2010. The royalty is a factor of the with profitability - a progressive mechanism. It has been successfully
gross sales value at “transfer” multiplied by a sliding rate royalty rate implemented in the RSA; however, there is now debate about
determined by profitability. There is a minimum royalty of 0.5% and a
whether it captures sufficiently additional rents and a call for a 50%
different calculation / maximum royalty for unrefined versus refined product
rent-style tax has been made.
as follows:
Pros
 Refined: 0.5 + (EBIT refined minerals/ ) x100
Gross sales of refined minerals x 12.5
 Unrefined: 0.5 + (EBIT refined minerals/ Gross sales of refined minerals x 9.0) x100  A minimum royalty value can be set (under any ISA scenario this
should be higher than 0.5% to be in line with rates of payment;
The maximum rate for refined minerals is 5% and 7% for unrefined. Based
 A higher cap can be imposed if appropriate in the formula;
on historical data, the Treasury in 2008 calculated an average of royalty of
 There is no complicated discussion over interest deduction (EBIT
2.7%. The royalty caps apply at relatively high net profit margins – 56.25%
is before interest costs);
for refined and 58.5% unrefined.
 Applies to all mineral categories – no individual mineral rates
 Transfer: disposal; export; consumption / theft.
 Gross sales: amount received or accrued during year of assessment. Cons
Transportation, handling and insurance costs are excluded;
 Deduction of full capital expenditure, including mine development
 EBIT:
o this is calculated after a full deduction for capital expenditure costs is generous and tends toward a RRT / income tax type
(accelerated depreciation); model; this is not entirely appropriate for a royalty calculation –
o but transportation, handling and insurance costs are excluded either as payment for the mineral resource or “an ability to pay”;
 Followed a long consultation process with the mining industry.
Exemptions: gross sales < R10m per year; royalty < R100 000. Sampling
Trade-offs will be inherent in the calculation methodology
/ testing: exempt < R100 000 gross sales.
(original proposal was based on EBITDA, not EBIT);
Arm’s length & general anti-avoidance rules in Act.
Constants: the fixed factor such as 12.5, was intended to ensure  Timing of profit-related revenues delayed for several years
rates varied between 1 and 5% with a 2.4% average. potentially.
EBIT margin: the above formula in respect of unrefined minerals
produces a royalty of 3.3% at an EBIT/gross sales level of 25%
(reasonable for mining industry); the maximum royalty of 7% at an
EBIT margin of 58.5% (at 70%, the royalty would be c.8.3%).
No ring fencing.
Royalty deductible for CIT.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 106

[Page 107]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
10. Annex - Fiscal mechanisms and financial payments
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 107

[Page 108]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Comparison of royalty rates and special mining taxes for base metals125
Country Royalty rate Royalty base Amendments (last 10 years)
/ Comments
Ad valorem royalty – rate applied to a realised (invoice) value
7.5% - (ore, crushed & screened) A gross sales / invoice value less
Australia - WA 5.0% - concentrates allowable deductions (transport & + Federal RRT – see below
2.5% - metal packaging)
(Nickel – per tonne royalty formula)
Argentina 3% Net smelter return
Bolivia 2% Gross revenues based on + 25% surtax on net income
international prices
Botswana 3.0% - minerals Gross market value – sales value N/A
5.0% - precious metals receivable at mine gate (no
deductions)
Mineral sales revenue less taxes
Brazil 2.0% - current
levied on revenue, insurance and
freight costs
4.0% - new Gross sales  4.0% = max – no categories
determined
N/A
Congo, Democratic Republic 2.0% Gross sales less transportation,
insurance and marketing
125 Principally jurisdictions with significant land-based mining regimes, mining minerals similar to DSM minerals (see U.S. Geological Survey Mineral Commodity Summaries
January 2013).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 108

[Page 109]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Country Royalty rate Royalty base Amendments (last 10 years)
/ Comments
Ad valorem royalty – rate applied to a realised (invoice) value
Colombia 5% - metallic minerals Gross sales less transportation,
insurance and marketing
12% - nickel
Congo, Republic 3% ?
 Plus specific - RMB 10–25/ton
China 0.5% - 4% Sales revenue
 Seabed Minerals (Royalties)
Cook Islands 3% Export value FOB (if CIF, deduct
Regulations 2013
marine transport & insurance)
 + RRT
Gabon 4%-6% Not known
 Changed in 2011 from a range of
Ghana 5% Sales turnover
3.0-6.0%
Indonesia 4.0% - Cu Sale proceeds
4.0-5.0%- Ni
3.0% - Zn
 + Excess profit tax (RRT)
Kazakhstan 2.5%-7.0% royalty Based on average exchange price of
extracted minerals
 + Surtax (RRT)
Liberia 3% ad valorem FMV – FOB Liberia – no deductions
 New in 2012
Mali 3% Mine value less fees and expenses
Morocco 3% -
Mozambique 3% - minerals Gross sales
5% - precious
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 109

[Page 110]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Country Royalty rate Royalty base Amendments (last 10 years)
/ Comments
Ad valorem royalty – rate applied to a realised (invoice) value
In the case of Solwara-1, the
Papua New Guinea 2% Net smelter return
PNG government has a 30%
+ 0.25% To Mineral Resource Authority stake in the project.
The Philippines regime may
Philippines 5% - mines on mineral reservations Market value of gross output
change through the application
2% - mineral excise126 Market value of gross output of a 10% charge on gross
revenues to replace existing
charges
Russian Federation 6%-8% Value of minerals extracted. Value is
based on quantity and sales price
Mineral resources extraction tax
(net of taxes) reduced by freight &
refining costs. Where no sales in a
period, the calculation is made on
production costs.
Max rate refined (5%), unrefined
South Africa 0.5% (min) – 5% or 7% (max) Gross sales less transport and
(7%). Actual rate linked to EBIT
insurance
Tanzania 4% Gross sales
Tonga 3% Export value FOB (if CIF, deduct
marine transport & insurance)
Uruguay 5% - Years 1-5 Gross revenue
8% - Year 6+
126 IMF recommendation that these be combined and applied inside and outside reservation areas. In view of the high rate, it was proposed that the companies be allowed a
tax credit against CIT for an amount in excess of 5% plus a 10% uplift for unused credits. In addition to the above is a local business tax on extraction of 2%. This together with
other similar payments pushes production based charges close to 10% of gross output.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 110

[Page 111]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Country Royalty rate Royalty base Amendments (last 10 years)
/ Comments
Ad valorem royalty – rate applied to a realised (invoice) value – US Severance Taxes
 Nevada net proceeds tax
USA - Nevada 5.0% (max) Net proceeds (gross proceeds less
cost of extraction, transportation
costs, marketing and delivery of
mineral, fi re and worker’s insurance,
production royalties and
depreciation).
USA - other 2%-5% Generally on a net proceeds /
adjusted gross revenues basis
Ad valorem royalty – rate varies by metal price
Australia - Queensland 2.50% to 5.00% - varying in 0.02% A gross sales value less marine
increments) depending on average transport, insurance & processing N/A
metal prices e.g. at LME / based on discount (metal not recoverable)
quarterly avg. / published table.
Current:
4.32% - copper
2.74% - nickel
2.50% - cobalt
2.64% - zinc
[5.00% - silver
5.00% - gold]
Separate category
2.7% - manganese
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 111

[Page 112]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Country Royalty rate Royalty base Amendments (last 10 years) /
Comments
 3.2% (2004)
India 4.2% Cu (2009) LME metal price chargeable on the
contained copper metal in ore
produced  3.0% (2004)
4.2% Mn Ore (2009) Ad valorem basis  1.0% (2004)
1.4% Mn concentrate (2009) Ad valorem basis
0.12% Ni (2009) LME metal price chargeable on
contained nickel metal in ore
produced.  6.6% (2004)
8.0% Zn Ore (2009) LME metal price chargeable on
contained zinc metal in ore produced
8.4% Zn concentrate LME metal price on chargeable on
contained zinc metal in concentrate
produced
 Royalty surtax (2011) –
Mongolia 5% Total sales values where exported –
progressive price brackets; ore,
referenced to international market
concentrate and product
prices
dependent royalty. High rates to
encourage local beneficiation
 3% in 2011
Zambia 6% Norm value = avg. monthly LME
cash price per metric tonne x
quantity of metal sold
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 112

[Page 113]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Country Royalty rate Royalty base Amendments (last 10 years) /
Comments
Profit-based tax royalty / Additional Profit Tax
“Net value”= GR less (OC + CRD +  Ring-fenced by project
Australia – Northern Territory 20%
EEE + AD) where:  First A$50 000 is not liable to tax
 GR is the gross realised revenue;  Detailed guidelines
 OC is operating costs;  Net value losses may be carried
 CRD is a Capital Recognition forward with approval
Deduction;  OC must be reasonable & directly
 EEE is eligible exploration attributable. Includes
expenditure; and rehabilitation & pre-production
 AD is other deductions approved  No interest / depreciation
by the Minister expense but CRD = LTBR + 2%
 For 3 years, 1st $10m of profits
Canada – Ontario 10% Taxable profits > $500k (5% remote
is exempt
locations)
 Detailed taxable profit definition
 Increased from 18% in 2010
Gross revenue less operating  Ring fenced
Canada – Quebec (current) 16%
expenses and allowances directly  A new mining tax regime is being
related to the mine, including proposed
exploration & development expenses
Taxable mining income  Adopted 2006
Chile 5%-14%
Rate depends on operating profit  Rates apply to operators >
margin ratio 50,000 MTFC
 7-page long look up table
created
Mining royalty on EBITDA  Deductible for CIT
Mexico 7.5%
Environmental erosion fee on gross
0.5%
revenues (precious metals only)
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 113

[Page 114]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Country Royalty rate Royalty base Amendments (last 10 years) /
Comments
Peru 1.00-12.0% (mineral royalty) Operating income – based on
operating margin; minimum 1%
revenue
2.00%-8.4% (special mining tax) Operating income
Hybrid mineral royalty / tax
 Ring-fenced
Canada – British Columbia 2% - net current proceeds (Min) Revenue less certain operating costs
 1st tier creditable against 2nd tier
13% - net revenue tax Net current proceeds less capital
 A minerals tax rather than a
costs, exploration costs, pre-
royalty
production development costs and an
investment allowance
Mine mouth revenue = Gross  Pay greater of the two after
Canada – Alberta 1%
revenue less transportation “payout”
then after payout:
Net revenue deduct exploration,  Payout: gross revenue from 1st
12%
development, recovery, processing, month of sale = total of
and transportation costs or exploration & development costs
allowances, as well as any carry
forward deductions
 Minimum mining tax (1% or 4%)
Canada – Quebec 1% 1st C$80m output value mine head
available for carry forward
4% Output value in excess C$80m
(proposed) against Mining Tax on profit
Or
 Output value = gross value less
16% 0% - 35% profit margin
operating / admin expenses,
22% 35%-50% profit margin
deprecation and processing
28% 50% - 100% profit margin
allowance
 Profit margin = Operators mining
profit/Total of the gross value of annual output for
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 114

[Page 115]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
all mines
 Effective rate (incl. federal)
38.6% to 42.4% (75% margin)
Country Rate Calculation base Amendments (last 10 years)
/ Comments
Rent Resource Type Taxes
 Only applies to coal and iron ore
Australia 22.5% Resource rent
 Repeal in 2014?
 Seabed Minerals (Royalties)
Cook Islands 3% royalty Export value FOB (if CIF, deduct
Regulations 2013
marine transport & insurance)
+
25% On positive cash balance. Positive
taxable income less capex, CIT paid,
negative cash balance b/fwd plus
depreciation, finance charges, CIT
loss c/fwd. Any negative cash
balance b/fwd uplifted by 120%
Kazakhstan 2.5%-7.0% royalty Based on average exchange price of
extracted minerals
Progressive rates based on the R-
0%-60%
factor model
 Kicks in where a projects pre-tax
Liberia (surtax) 20% On positive net cash flow
rate of return > 22.5%
Revenues less costs; where negative
(+3% ad valorem royalty)  Capex & exploration spend
uplift by 1.225 each year; c/fwd until
100% deduction
positive net cash flow
 Surtax deductible for CIT
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 115

[Page 116]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Corporate tax rates 2014
Median 28.0%
Average (weighted) GDP (excl. USA) 27.2%
Average (weighted) GDP 32.5%
Average - simple 27.5%
Ukraine 16.0%
Chile 18.5%
Poland 19.0%
Russian Federation 20.0%
Kazakhstan 20.0%
Botswana 22.0%
Myanmar 25.0%
Malaysia 25.0%
Ireland 25.0%
Indonesia 25.0%
Dominican Republic 25.0%
China 25.0%
Bolivia 25.0% Corporate tax rates
South Africa 28.0%
Philippines 30.0%
Peru 30.0%
Morocco 30.0%
Mexico 30.0%
Gabon 30.0%
Congo DR 30.0%
Australia 30.0%
Canada 31.0%
Colombia 33.0%
India 34.0%
Brazil 34.0%
Zambia 35.0%
New Caledonia 35.0%
USA 40.0%
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45%
127
127 Source: KPMG Corporate Tax Rates 2005-2013 http://www.kpmg.com/global/en/services/tax/tax-tools-and-resources/pages/corporate-tax-rates-table.aspx [31 0114].
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 116

[Page 117]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
11. Environmental considerations & financial terms
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 117

[Page 118]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
As all LTC members will appreciate, this is a highly significant adverse change”.128 This is a developing area in
sensitive area which is gaining exponential exposure and international law and something the LTC / ISA can make a
comment. Consequently, it merits dedicated time, major contribution toward.
discussion and development of specific regulations
2. Legal matters
including the implications for Contractor financial terms.
Though this section is neither intended to provide a detailed
legal analysis of the current exploration regime, nor that
1. Introduction relating to an exploitation regime, clearly legal obligations will a
This section considers the relationship between environmental financial impact.
considerations and the financial terms applicable to the DSM
The ISA as a matter of policy and law (through its Mining Code)
regime.
places a great emphasis on marine environmental protection
Its purpose is to provide some “food for thought” for further (MEP). However, this is against the background of relatively
discussion in considering the interaction between environmental poor data (save at a high level qualitative analysis) and, as yet
considerations and ISA financial terms. Any financial aspects of little, in the way of identifiable environmental baselines.
the Mining Code which are related to the environment should
Under the PN Exploration Regulations and the LOSC129, there
both encourage and support good environmental behaviour
are a number of points to highlight:
while penalising poor environmental practices.
 the ISA “must ensure effective protection for the marine
Furthermore, and from an investor perspective, sponsored
environment from harmful effects” of the activities in the
Contractors (and Sponsoring States) will need to understand
Area and is obliged to develop rules, regulations and
their environmental obligations as these will need to be
procedures inter alia to protect the natural resources and
quantified (or at least best estimates made) and factored into
prevent damage to the fauna and flora;130
any project investment appraisal model.
Equally, some direction needs to be given as to how the 128 Regulation 1(3)(f). That said, Annex IV, Section 16 holds a contractor “liable for
the actual amount of any damage, including damage to the marine environment”
environment per se / humankind will be compensated for any
arising from wrongful acts or omissions. There is no liability threshold.
irreversible harm or damage – or perhaps to use the 129 See also ISA, Recommendations for the guidance of contractors for the
assessment of the possible environmental impacts arising from exploration for
terminology contained in the PN Exploration Regulations “any
polymetallic nodules in the Area, ISBA/16/LTC/7, 2 November 2010; International
Seabed Authority, Environmental Management Plan for the Clarion-Clipperton
Zone, ISBA/17/LTC/7, 13 July 2011.
130 Article 145(b) LOSC.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 118

[Page 119]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
 the application of the precautionary approach by all environment” arising from wrongful acts or omissions.139
parties;131 and the application of best environmental There is no liability threshold (serious, irreversible damage
practices / adaptive management;132 etc.).140 It is a basic principle of international environmental
 the development of procedures by the LTC for assessing law that the “polluter pays”. The polluter, being a sponsored
whether “activities in the Area would have serious harmful contractor, is responsible for any remedial or restoration
effects on vulnerable marine ecosystems;”133 costs.141 Equally, States may be held responsible if they
 contractors to take “necessary measures” to prevent & have failed in their due diligence obligations. This issue was
control pollution;134 considered in much detail by the Seabed Disputes Chamber
 cooperation on establishing and implementing monitoring in 2010/2011 for sponsoring States “to deploy adequate
programmes;135 means, to exercise best possible efforts, to do the utmost”
 establishing environmental baselines;136 to fulfil their due diligence obligations.142
 procedures connected with emergency orders;137
 environmental impact assessments and environmental There are a number of unknowns here which require further
management plans (environmental monitoring);138 discussion. Some of them are Catch 22 given a lack of
 [the development of APEIs]; knowledge and environmental baseline data. Given this, some
 liability: a contractor is to be held “liable for the actual of the discussions may be somewhat abstract in nature at this
amount of any damage, including damage to the marine point.
For example, what is serious harm or significant adverse
change. The law provides very little guidance on this. Indeed,
131 The SDC Advisory Opinion highlighted a number of direct obligations imposed
on States including the application of the precautionary approach, the requirement
for EIAs and BEPs and the need to co-operate with the ISA. The issue of due 139 Annex IV, Section 16.
diligence is a legal one and the SDC has established an initial benchmark as to the 140 The development of an international environmental liability regime is, at best,
expected standards level of marine environmental protection, albeit of a general embryonic.
nature which requires expanding into specific guidelines. 141 See Principle 16 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development that “the
132 These points were considered at the Fiji workshop in 2011 but further work is polluter should, in principle bear the cost of pollution…”. See also Article 1
required to operationalise them. European Directive on Environmental Liability which seeks “to establish a
133 Regulation 31(4). framework of environmental liability based on the ‘polluter-pays' principle, to
134 Regulation 31(5). prevent and remedy environmental damage”.
135 Regulation 31(6). 142 Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
136 Regulation 32(1); Annex IV, section 5 Responsibilities and Obligations of States Sponsoring Persons and Entities with
137 Regulation 33. Respect to Activities in the Area, Advisory Opinion, List of cases: No. 17, 1
138 See ISA Technical Study: No. 10 outlining an environmental impact statement. February 2011 at para 110.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 119

[Page 120]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
aside from any legal and scientific guidance, there are also a (sediment removal) and indirect (plume) impacts of mining”.145
number of ethical issues here which require input from the Is this acceptable to international society?
international community and thus require incorporating into any
As a minimum, a full-blown precautionary risk management
public consultation document.143
framework needs to be developed and implemented.
What are the detailed standards applicable to a due diligence
Naturally, the nature of such a framework has financial
approach that must be taken by all parties, particularly
implications.
sponsored contractors?
3. The environment and financial terms
And what should be preserved? International stakeholders have
There are six elements that require consideration here:
yet to determine the exact nature of a preservation obligation
1. How can the financial terms be structured to provide an
and the extent to which all or specific species of organisms
incentive to encourage investment (R&D) in environmental
should be preserved. The current legal framework favours a
maximum rather than an absolute protection approach.144 What technologies and marine scientific research?
are the trade-offs? 2. The imposition of a general environmental charge or levy:
its basis, calculation and subsequent application of funds?
In connection with marine diamond mining and its associated
environmental impact, a De Beers Report to Society states inter
alia that “[i]n the marine environment active rehabilitation is not The Seabed Disputes Chamber recommended a trust fund
be established to cover situations where environmental
possible, so activities need to focus on monitoring the direct
damage were there is no recourse to any person.
3. The imposition of a “user fee” for the use of other natural
resources?
4. What are the restorative / rehabilitative obligations of
143 A qualitative assessment of DSM impacts is presented in ISA Technical Study
Contractors? Can these be quantified?
No. 9.
144 The strategic goal remains the conservation, being management and
5. What are the specific procedural obligations of Contractors
maintenance (or preservation), of the marine environment such that the maximum
amount of genetic material, species populations and ecosystem diversity is during day-to-day operations under the precautionary
delivered. Provided there is such representative diversity and the structure and
functioning of an ecosystem is not impaired on a long term basis, the primary
obligation to protect and preserve the marine environment under article 192 LOSC 145 De Beers, Living Up To Diamonds, Report to Society 2010 at 90, available at
would appear to be fulfilled. http://www.debeersgroup.com/ImageVaultFiles/id_1000/cf_5/RTS_10_Full.PDF .
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 120

[Page 121]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
approach and best environmental practice? How are these
to be operationalised? How are these to be enforced? What
level of fines & penalties are appropriate for a breach of
these obligations?
6. Marine environmental damage and liability: ultimately what
will the liability / redress mechanism be for any “significant
adverse change” or any damage?
The financial terms should reflect the legal obligations of
Contractors under the exploitation regulations and
contemporary environmental justice.
The table overleaf considers some of the above elements and
concerns, together with some initial thoughts to stimulate
further discussion.
Ultimately, a number of these points will need to be addressed
in a public consultation document.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 121

[Page 122]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Environmental considerations and proposed financially-related response mechanisms
Environmental consideration Considered response / approach
1. General: What are the specific The Exploration Regulations contain a number of environmental-related obligations, not least the protection
environmental obligations for DSM and preservation of the marine environment and the application of the precautionary approach.
exploitation? What will be expected
However, in respect of an exploitation code, there does not appear, as yet, to be any substantive obligations
(contractual) obligations of
as regards the rehabilitation or restoration of the deep sea mining area.147 Equally, what of infrastructure
Contractors (and / or Sponsoring
removal obligations (perhaps minimal given the mobile nature of the mining equipment – collector, riser,
States)146 in connection with the
surface ships)?
environment?
Whatever the specific obligations, these will have an impact on financial rates of return which will need to be
factored into any economic model.
Under Annex IV, Section 16.5 of the PN Exploration Regulations, contractors are required to maintain
2. Insurance
“appropriate insurance policies…in accordance with generally accepted international maritime practice”. While
the environmental impacts for exploration are deemed minimal (save for any testing of equipment / small-
scale mining), what will the requirements be of insurance policies for environmental damage? Again,
insurance costs have financial implications. Perhaps this will be captured by general wording.
What will the nature (obligation) and quantum of any environmental guarantee be? What will it need to cover
3. Environmental guarantee /
– liability for damage, obligation to restore?
Environmental Fund
Or will Contractors be expected to make a cash contribution to an Environmental Fund in place or in addition
to a guarantee – cash is better. Consideration will need to be given to the fiscal treatment of any such
payment. How will any fund by invested? How will income on the fund be returned / distributed? For
example, the Mineral Law of Mongolia (Article 38) requires a mining licence holder to deposit 50% of its
environmental protection budget (as approved from the environmental plan) into a “special” bank account.
For / over what duration (years) will a guarantee / contribution be required? If a typical DSM operation has a
life cycle of 20 years, would say a guarantee be sufficient for a further 10, 20 or 30 years post de-
146 Subject to their “responsibility to ensure” obligations under UNCLOS as set out in the ITLOS Advisory Opinion.
147 Though the International Marine Minerals Society’s Code for Environmental Management of Marine Mining calls for suitable closure plans leaving sites and ecosystems,
where possible, in a “rehabilitated condition”.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 122

[Page 123]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
commissioning of a mining site?
What about the situation where a Contractor goes into liquidation / defaults on guarantee? If there are any
restoration obligations how will these be funded?
Any bond / guarantee needs to indexed (inflationary adjustments).
Western Australia, for example, has implemented a Mining Rehabilitation Fund where an operator fails in
their obligation to rehabilitate. The Fund is currently voluntary but from 1 July 2014 is mandatory. The Fund
Contribution Rate is proposed at 1% of the Rehabilitation Liability Estimate.
It is considered appropriate that a general environmental levy or charge is reflected in the financial terms for
4. Environmental Levy / Charge
DSM exploitation? The basis of such a charge, its calculation and the subsequent use of the pool of monies
requires careful consideration.
Some countries do have specific environmental levies in the mining sector. For example, the Congo
(Republic) has a pollution tax of 0.2% of turnover.
Use of monies?
 Trust fund;
 Cash grants for environmental R&D projects;
 Marine scientific research programmes;
 Capacity building;
 Default by mining contractors on restoration.
In the terrestrial environment, mining companies are heavy users of other natural resources such a
5. User fees
groundwater. In the DSM environment the discharge of water at the initial processing stage is seen as
particularly hazardous with its consequential on the water column. Though there may be a “freedom of the
high seas” debate, consideration could be given to the levy of a “water fee” being measured in say X dollars
per cubic metre of water discharged. Such a fee could be a progressive one and linked to a pre-determined
level of water quality. Consequently, it would both act as “negative” charge on profits but by its progressive
nature stimulates positive behaviour in delivering beneficial filtration techniques.
Is there potential for overlapping environmental obligations and possible claims on “adjacent” Is there
6. Overlapping obligations / claims potential for overlapping environmental obligations and possible claims on “adjacent” mining areas? Given
the potential for, say sediment dispersal, how will specific environmental liabilities and / or obligations be
dealt with?
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 123

[Page 124]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Firstly, this will require assessment under an EIA / precautionary risk management process as to the
7. What if destruction of the seafloor,
probability of and level of any impact. The UNCLOS makes specific reference to “serious harm” and
active SMS or fishing ground around
vulnerable marine ecosystems…..serious adverse change. But these terms have yet to be adequately
a seamount is inevitable /
defined.148
unavoidable?
However, where harm (say irreversible) has been caused, how will this be valued and compensated for?149
Could consideration be given to a biodiversity offset programme?150
Give consideration to fixed penalty mechanisms for violations of procedural obligations – Contractor and / or
8. Penalty mechanisms151
Sponsoring State?
For example:
 Failure to follow / enforce an agreed Environmental Management Plan;
 Failure to train staff in environmental procedures;
 Failure to notify S-G under emergency orders regulation;
 Failure to develop / maintain a Precautionary Risk Management plan and process;
 Failure to comply with an order of the Council;
 Toxicity levels of water discharges above agreed levels – measurable impacts would be preferable rather
than “simple” breach of procedural obligations.
 Noise pollution above agreed levels;
Penalties can be classified depending on the perceived seriousness of the DSM Regulations violation (Class I,
II, III etc)
Quantum?
 Range, say US$10 000 – 50 000 – dependent on the seriousness of the offence (its nature, the level of
impact or threat to the environment, the duration of the offence and number of previous violations);
 Similar to the US’s EPA programme, a levy equal to the financial benefit or gain derived from the
violation.
Would need to be an appeals process.
148 See ISA Technical Study No. 9 for qualitative analysis of impacts.
149 See Barbier EB “Protect the deep sea” 505 Nature (2014) 475-477 at 476: US$75m estimate to restore one hectare of trawled seabed located at the Darwin Mounds.
150 See generally ICMM Independent report on biodiversity offsets January 2013.
151 Specific to the DSM regime. Contractors and other operators will be subject to specific domestic legislation (e.g. flag State international obligations in connection with
shipping pollution - MARPOL 73/78) including any additional requirements imposed by a Sponsoring State on a sponsored Contractor.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 124

[Page 125]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Use of fines & penalties – environmental fund / inspector regime?
Remote enforcement an issue – except where a system of inspectors is deployed.
Prior to the equipment testing phase, a sponsored contractor must provide the Council with a guarantee of its
9. Emergency orders
financial and technical capability to comply with the emergency orders (PN Regulation 33(8)). What is the
nature of this “guarantee”?
The issue of emergency orders is a complex area. Suspending or stopping mining operations will have
financial repercussions for the contractor. When / at what point is there a requirement to notify?
Aside from the possibility of a general environmental levy on operators (including the Enterprise and any joint
10. CHM / ISA obligations /
venture arrangements), consideration should be given to retaining a proportion of the financial payments
responsibilities
(the production or extraction charges) received by the ISA for contribution to a general environmental fund
(a trust fund). It should be noted that the ISA / Enterprise on behalf of the CHM could be held liable for
environmental (fault-based) damage.
11. Implementation of international Environmental management systems implementation: ISO 14001 by Contractors?
standards
12. Environmental taxation It is recommended that a study be undertaken into the area of environmental taxation to determine current
thinking, trends and best practice – and what could be appropriate / adopted in a DSM environment.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 125

[Page 126]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
12. Contractor incentives & risk mitigation
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 126

[Page 127]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Incentives & risk mitigation
Overview As highlighted under Policy Objectives, the ISA is to attract investments and technology, to provide incentives to
undertake JVs with Enterprise and developing States / stimulate technology transfer & training. Additionally, in
considering rates of payment, countries do provide special incentives to mining companies to stimulate investment, which,
by their nature reduce headline rates of payment.
The issue of environmental protection being a core element of the CHM principle also requires special consideration.
Consequently, incentives merit consideration as part of financial terms. The purpose of this section is to provide an
overview of possible incentives to stimulate further discussion in this area.
Note: Financial incentives, under the LOSC, must not subsidise Contractors leading to any artificial competitive advantage.
That said, most land-based mining regimes offer a wide variety of incentives thus reducing headline tax rates.
Some of the incentives outlined below will depend of the system of payments adopted. A profit-related system is more
suited to developing incentive mechanisms than a pure royalty mechanism.
A number of mining-specific incentives have been created by countries to attract mobile investment capital; their impact
on fiscal take can be dramatic.
It should be remembered that incentives, while contemplated by the LOSC, need very careful
consideration. Specific targeting is needed. Overly generous incentives will undermine the objective of
optimal revenues for the ISA and the economics of DSM.152 Equally, they can result in a profit shift – fiscal
leakage to a home country taxing State, create distortions, add a layer of administrative complexity and
support wasteful and inefficient mining practices.
1. Should any special Many unknowns and uncertainties in the DSM environment stem from a lack of knowledge. Conducting pilot or
privileges or incentives test mining operations would enhance stakeholder knowledge.
be afforded during and /
Consider, in addition to enhanced deductions, perhaps a “fiscal holiday” type mechanism where for an agreed
or to encourage a pilot
mining operation? That number of contractors / operators, financial obligations are reduced or eliminated for a specific period of time
152 A review in 2010 of Australia’s natural resource taxation lead to a number of recommendations. “Recommendation 46: The resource rent tax should not provide
concessions to encourage exploration or production activity at a faster rate than the commercial rate or in particular geographical areas, and should not allow deductions above
acquisition costs to stimulate investment”.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 127

[Page 128]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
is a transitional post commercial production.
arrangement prior to
Would this be discriminatory? On the face of it perhaps. But it would support other policy objectives. Once the
commercial production?
unknowns are better understood and costed, this could increase investments in the Area. Equally, those who
have born the initial risk of test mining should be rewarded.
2. Royalty relief In periods of low commodity pricing, a royalty, in particular can have an impact on a mining operation,
particularly a marginal one. Consideration could be given to granting the Council discretionary powers to defer or
suspend any royalty obligation imposed under the ISA financial regime.
Clear and concise criteria would need to be developed for such a deferral or suspension which must, as a
minimum not be applied in a discriminatory fashion nor give any artificial advantage to DSM miners.
Though not specifically mentioned as a mechanism, the LOSC (Annex III, Article 19) does provide for
negotiations with the parties where a circumstances arise / likely arise making the contract “inequitable,
impracticable or impossible to achieve objectives”; until the DSM regime “settles” and uncertainties are
narrowed, it is not unrealistic that some relief may need to be granted, particularly given the cyclical nature of
commodity pricing.
Clearly, such relief is more appropriate for a regressive royalty system (i.e. one based on sales) than a
progressive one (linked to profitability). The latter will, to a large extent have an in-built relief mechanism.
Zambia, for example, provides (discretionary) for a deferral of royalties where the cash operating margin falls
below zero.
3. Exploration expenditure There are a number of elements which could encourage exploration expenditure under a financial regime –
(Incentive – contractors) depending on the final terms adopted.
Accelerated153 or enhanced154 deduction for exploration expenditure. Argentina, for example, provides for a
double (200%) tax deduction on exploration expenditure to encourage investment. This may be appropriate
during the early years of DSM activities in order to encourage and promote further exploration but it needs very
careful consideration, not least given the impact of any brought forward (and potentially “old”) exploration costs.
Any enhanced deduction (see also R&D below) could be restricted to specific categories of expenditure, e.g.
153 Accelerated depreciation allows persons to claim a larger amount of depreciation in earlier years. E.g. 60% in year 1, 20% in year 2 and 20% in year 3. This compares
favourably to say a 10-year straight-line depreciation rate being 10% each year for 10 years.
154 An enhanced deduction generally increases an immediate expense by a percentage uplift.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 128

[Page 129]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
marine scientific research. But there would need to be say clear and targeted guidelines which deliver a benefit.
Indeed, whether enhanced deductions over and above original investment should be available is questionable. It
shifts risk – and ultimately profit.
As to accelerated depreciation, this simply defers tax cash flows to later years. It provides a benefit to a
Contractor in improving cash flow in the early years.
4. Exploration expenditure Conversely, from the viewpoint of the ISA and optimal revenues, exploration costs need to be managed and
(risk mitigation –ISA) “contained” with the financial regime. The following points should be noted:
 Many regimes provide for the immediate expensing of exploration costs or expensing at the point of commercial
production;
 The “quality” of exploration costs varies particularly with time – remoteness from mining operations; their quantum may
be significant and impact early rents;
 How will brought forward exploration be treated / apportioned in any rent mechanism?
 Operation of section 10.2(c) PN Regulations: it creates expectation of set-off but it's also restrictive....actual and
direct and as part of development costs, not exploration costs per se. Also requires a certified annual statement.
 Risk mitigation:
o “actual and direct”;
o Time limit - Ireland has a time limit of 25 years under O&G rules on prior exploration costs;
o Ring fencing – no offset against other contract areas;
o In the US, taxpayers may either 1. deduct 70% (30% amortized over 5 years) or 2. capitalize 100% and
amortise over 10 years (for foreign exploration costs only the latter). For 1., any amounts expensed are
recaptured in gross income or deducted against depletion allowance at the production stage. Adds a layer of
complexity;
o Restricting deduction where commercial production has not commenced by an agreed date?
Consideration to provide “tax credits” or accelerated allowances / enhanced deductions / cash grants for specific
5. Research & development
research and development expenditure. Many countries provide R&D tax incentives to stimulate technology
improvements. For the DSM regime, this could be targeted at marine engineering technology or environmental
protection preservation technology.
What constitutes “R&D” would need clearly defining. And needs a prior approval mechanism from ISA LTC.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 129

[Page 130]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Mechanism? E.g. tax offset (deduction) – US$100 on qualifying R&D, tax relief (deduction) is, say, US$130 – an
uplift of 30%.
Specific regimes:155
 Australia: allows a 40-45% offset (specific rules);
 China: 150% super deduction eligible expenses (specific rules: eligible expenditure e.g. site testing expenses
for exploration activities & eligible industries e.g. marine engineering technology, new environmental
preservation technology;
 Brazil: 160-200% super deduction on eligible expenses / 100% accelerated depreciation on R&D assets;
 India: 200% super-deduction of scientific research expenditure;
 Russian Federation: 150% super-deduction on eligible expenses (eligibility requirements);
 South Africa: 150% super-deduction of eligible expenses (pre-approval process) / accelerated depreciation
on assets.
6. Training – Capacity Tax credit mechanism or royalty rate reduction for specific training and / or capacity building initiatives.
Development
7. JV arrangements with Aside from other incentives outlined in this section, some form of "royalty” relief or tax holiday may be
the Enterprise / appropriate here?
developing States
8. Stimulate technology This area presents a challenge given the impact of the IA 1994 requiring that DSM technology shall be acquired
transfer “on fair and reasonable commercial terms and conditions on the open market”.156 Indeed, the whole area of
technology transfer should be the subject of an independent study. Ultimately, technology dispersal will facilitate
economies of scale within the DSM environment. But this is subject to intellectual property rights.
9. Different minerals Though not strictly an incentive per se and very much dependent on rates of payment, there may be argument
to support different minerals should be subject to differing royalty rates owing to different extraction costs &
value (social and financial)? However, this adds to administrative complexity. Most multi-mineral regimes have
155 See EY 2013 Asia-Pacific R&D incentives
156 IA 1994 Annex, Section 5.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 130

[Page 131]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
now reduced the number of mineral royalty categories.
10. Small versus large scale A number of territories do provide incentives for small / junior mining companies e.g. under profit-related
operations mechanisms a de minimis profit threshold. Should any distinction be made in a DSM context?
Some territories offer fiscal stability agreements. These are not at this time considered appropriate for the DSM
11. Stability agreements
regime. Any amendments to financial terms, upwards or downwards, should be applied on a non-discriminatory
basis.
12. High grading Perhaps not particularly relevant to incentives per se, but financial terms as a whole. But are there any specific
mechanisms that discourage this behaviour? Is it a particular concern under the DSM regime?
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 131

[Page 132]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Annexure – Glossary of Terms
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 132

[Page 133]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Glossary of Terms – Financial & Mining157
Accelerated Method of depreciation under which taxpayers may allocate larger depreciation deductions to the first year or first few years of useful
Depreciation business assets, such as plant and machinery.
Accounting Method of calculating amounts subject to income tax and VAT. In respect of VAT, tax would be computed as a percentage levy on the
Basis excess of sales over purchases. This is a theoretical concept and no country uses it
Accounting A period of time used by a taxpayer for the determination of tax liability.
Period
Accounting All documents and books used in the preparation of the tax return and all financial statements, including general ledger, subsidiary
Records ledgers, sales slips, and invoices.
Accrual Basis An accounting method whereby income and expense items are included in taxable income or expense as they are earned or
(Accrual incurred, rather than when they are received or paid.
Method)
Ad Valorem A tax on goods or property expressed as a percentage of the sales price or assessed value.
Tax
Administrative Expenses that are not as easily associated with a specific function as are the direct costs of manufacturing and selling. It typically
Expenses includes expenses of the headquarters office and accounting expenses.
Advance An arrangement that determines, in advance of controlled transactions, an appropriate set of criteria (e.g. method, comparables and
Pricing appropriate adjustments thereto, critical assumptions as to future events) for the determination of the transfer pricing for those
Arrangement transactions over a fixed period of time. An advance pricing arrangement may be unilateral involving one tax administration and a
157 Sources including Allen & Overy Guide to Extractive Industries Documents – Mining: World Bank Institute Governance for Extractive Industries Programme January 2013;
AngloGold Ashanti Glossary of Terms; The EITI Glossary (http://eiti.org/glossary); OECD Glossary of Tax Terms (http://www.oecd.org/ctp/glossaryoftaxterms.htm); European
Central Bank (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/glossary/html/glossa.en.html) and various IMF sources.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 133

[Page 134]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
(APA) taxpayer or multilateral involving the agreement of two or more tax administrations.
Affiliated General term used to describe the relationship between two or more companies linked by a common interest
Companies
Amortization Process of writing off the cost of an intangible asset over its useful life.
Arm's Length The international standard which states that, where conditions between related enterprises are different from those between
Principle independent enterprises, profits which have accrued by reason of those conditions may be included in the profits of that enterprise
and taxed accordingly.
Arms’ Length A transaction where a willing (but not anxious) seller and buyer, with no prior relationship, act independently to reach an agreement.
Transaction: It is important for a transaction to be at arms’ length to demonstrate that price and other requirements are fair and representative of
transactions of a similar type in the market and are not ‘friendly’ transactions to, for example, avoid tax.
Assay A compositional analysis to determine the amount of metal in an ore or alloy.
Avoidance Generally used to describe the arrangement of a taxpayer's affairs that is intended to reduce his tax liability and that although the
arrangement could be strictly legal it is usually in contradiction with the intent or objective of the law it purports to follow. Contrasted
with evasion (generally illegal).
Balance Sheet Statement of the financial position of a business as of a particular date. The statement will show the business's assets in one
column and its liabilities and owner's equity in another column.
Base Cost Term used in capital gains tax legislation to denote the cost of an asset to an owner.
Base Metals In mining, base metals refer to industrial non-ferrous metals excluding precious metals. These include copper, lead, nickel and zinc.
Book Value The value of individual asset as recorded in the accounting records of a taxpayer, calculated as actual cost less allowances for any
depreciation.
Bonus Lump sum payment made in connection with mineral rights.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 134

[Page 135]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Capital Assets All property held for investment by a taxpayer.
Capital The amount of money required to purchase the right to mine a deposit, to purchase the plant and equipment required to operate it,
Expenditure: for preliminary development and for working capital. Expenditure on improvement rather than repair.
Capital Gain A gain on the sale of capital asset.
Capital Loss The loss from the sale of a capital asset.
Capitalise To record capital outlays as additions to asset accounts, not as expenses.
Carried Typically a State may have a carried interest in a project. It does not pay a commercial price for the interest and other parties pay for
interest the obligations.
Carryover A process by which the deductions or credits of one taxable year that cannot be used to reduce tax liability in that year are applied
against a tax liability in subsequent years (carry forward) or previous years (carry back).
Cash Basis The accounting method which recognizes income and deductions when money is received or paid.
(Cash Method)
CIF Price: The cost, insurance and freight price. The CIF Price is the price of a good delivered at the frontier of the importing country, including
any insurance and freight charges incurred to that point, before the payment of any import duties or other taxes on imports or trade
and transport margins within that country.
Comparability Comparison of controlled transaction conditions with conditions prevailing in transactions between independent enterprises
Analysis (uncontrolled transactions). Controlled and uncontrolled transactions are comparable if none of the differences between the
transactions could materially affect the factor being examined in the methodology (e.g. price or margin), or if reasonably accurate
adjustments can be made to eliminate the material effects of any such differences.
Comparable Under US regulations CPM is a method to determine an arm's length consideration for transfers of intangible property. If the reported
Profit Method operating income of the tested party is not within a certain range, an adjustment will be made. In effect this method requires a
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 135

[Page 136]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
comparison of the operating income that results from the consideration actually charged in a controlled transfer with the operating
income of similar taxpayers that are uncontrolled.
Comparable A transfer pricing method that compares the price for property or services transferred in a controlled transaction to the price charged
Uncontrolled for property or services transferred in a comparable uncontrolled transaction in comparable circumstances.
Price Method
(CUP)
Comparable A transfer pricing methodology used in the US, which determines an arm's length royalty rate for an intangible by reference to
Uncontrolled uncontrolled transfers of comparable intangible property under comparable circumstances.
Transaction
Method (CUT)
Concentrate The fine, powdery output from the milling process, containing a high percentage of valuable metals.
Concession: The grant of exclusive privileges by the state or a controlling authority. In the context of mining contracts, it specifically refers to a
grant of land or a grant of rights to the mineral resources themselves, with the right to enter land to do so, on which the mining
company carries out a commercial undertaking and pays rent and usually a royalty to the granting authority. Also known as a
tenement, licence or an authority to mine.
Corporate An income tax on the income of companies.
Income Tax
Credit, Tax Allowance of deduction from or a direct offset against the amount of tax due as opposed to an offset against income.
Credit, In relation to a dividend, credit for underlying tax is credit for the tax levied on the profits of the company out of which the dividends
Underlying Tax have been paid. Such relief may be given either under a tax treaty or in accordance with unilateral provisions.
Paid
Credit, Various kinds of income (such as dividends, interest, royalties) are taxed at source by requiring the payer to deduct tax and account
Withholding for it to the tax authorities (abroad). The taxpayer recipient is entitled to credit the tax withheld at source against his final tax
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 136

[Page 137]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Tax liabilities determined by (domestic) tax law of the country in which he is resident.
Customs Taxes on goods imported into a country.
Duties
Cut-off Grade The grade or concentration of mineral in rock where the value of the metal equals the costs of mining, processing and marketing the
contained commodity. The breakeven grade.
Dead Rent: Rent that must be paid on a mining lease, regardless of whether minerals are extracted.
Debt / Equity Relationship of total debt of a company to its ordinary share capital. If a corporate debt is disproportionately high in comparison with
Ratio its equity, the debt may be recharacterised as equity, resulting in a disallowance of the interest deduction and taxation of the funds
as dividends.
Deemed If a member of a multinational enterprise (MNE) receives an interest-free loan from an affiliated company, the tax authorities of the
Interest lender's country may readjust the lender's profits by adding an amount equal to the interest which would have been payable on the
loan had it been made at arm's length.
Delivery Point: The location where the commodity will be delivered. Due to transportation costs, the chosen location will have an effect on the net
cost. Thus, in order to specify a single contractual price, the delivery point is an essential detail.
Depreciation An accounting technique in which the cost of an asset is allocated over its useful life.
Direct Cost Cost identified with a particular transaction, such as raw materials, components and goods, wages and other processing expenses.
Direct Method Allocation method where the parent company or group service centre of a multinational enterprise providing central management
of Allocation of and other services charges each member of the group directly for individual services rendered.
Costs
Direct Taxes Direct taxes are taxes imposed on income, capital gains and net worth.
Distribution A payout of cash or property from a corporation to a shareholder.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 137

[Page 138]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Dividend A payment by a corporation to shareholders, which is taxable income of shareholders. Most corporations receive no deduction for it.
Double Double taxation arises when comparable taxes are imposed in two or more states on the same taxpayer in respect of the same
Taxation taxable income or capital, e.g. where income is taxable in the source country and in the country of residence of the recipient of such
income.
Downstream The activities in the mining industry taking place after production. E.g. transportation, refining, and marketing.
Earnings Profit before taxes have been paid. Sales revenue less cost of sales, operating expenses, depreciation / amortization and interest.
Before Taxes
(EBT)
Earnings Before Profit before taxation, net interest, amortisation of tangible and intangible assets and impairment of tangible assets.
Interest Tax,
Depreciation
and
Amortisation
(EBITDA)
Effective Tax The rate at which a taxpayer would be taxed if his tax liability were taxed at a constant rate rather than progressively. This rate is
Rate computed by determining what percentage the taxpayer’s tax liability is of his total taxable income.
Environmental Tax imposed for environmental reasons, e.g. to provide an incentive to reduce certain emissions to an optimal level or taxes on
Tax environmentally harmful products.
Equal General principle of taxation that requires that taxpayers pay an equal amount of tax if their circumstances are equal.
Treatment
Estimated For income tax purposes, where the records kept, particularly by small traders, are inadequate for a precise calculation of tax due, it
Assessment may be necessary for the taxable income or profits to be calculated by the tax authorities on the basis of an estimate.
Exchange of Most tax treaties contain a provision under which the tax authorities of one country may request the tax authorities of the other
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 138

[Page 139]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Information country to supply information on a taxpayer. Information may only be used for tax purposes in the receiving country and it must be
kept confidential, i.e. it can only be disclosed to the persons or authorities concerned with the assessment or collection of taxes
covered by the treaty.
Export duties Duty tax applied to the export of products.
Expenses Costs that are currently deductible, as opposed to capital expenditures, which may not be currently deducted but must be
depreciated or amortized over the useful life of the property.
Exploration The search to identify areas that may warrant examination of areas for mineral discoveries, including geological, geophysical and
topographical surveys and drilling prospecting wells. The aim of exploration is the discovery of commercial deposits.
Fair Market The price a willing buyer would pay a willing seller in a transaction on the open market.
Value
Federal Tax In federal states, taxation may exist on two levels: taxation by the federation or confederation, and taxation by the state or provinces.
Fiscal year The period which a country calculates its financial year. This may differ from the calendar year.
Fixed Assets Assets that are held by an enterprise either continuously or for a comparatively long period of time, generally more than one year.
FOB Price or The free on board price. The FOB Price means the costs associated with delivery, inspection and loading involved in putting minerals
Value on a tanker at a seller’s facilities which are included in the agreed price. The buyer pays all additional costs to transport and unload
the cargo. Roughly speaking, it’s the domestic price in the country of origin.
Foreign Tax Relief from domestic tax on income from abroad which has already suffered foreign tax. Generally speaking, two approaches are
Relief taken to foreign tax relief, i.e. the credit method or the exemption method.
GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles are the rules and practices required to be followed in keeping financial records and books
of account.
Goods & Sales VAT -- style multi-stage sales tax levied on purchases (and lessees). Sellers (and lessors) are generally responsible for collection.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 139

[Page 140]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Tax
Grade The amount of metal in each ton or tonne of ore, expressed as troy ounces per ton or grams per tonne for precious metals and as a
percentage for other metals. A term such as cut-off grade refers to the minimum metal grade at which an ore body can be
economically mined.
Grandfather Clause temporarily preserving legislation which exists at the time a law is modified or a (tax) treaty is concluded (or modified).
Clause
Gross A measure of economic activity, namely the value of an economy's total output of goods and services, less intermediate
domestic consumption, plus net taxes on products and imports, in a specified period. GDP can be broken down by output, expenditure or
product (GDP) income components. The main expenditure aggregates that make up GDP are household final consumption, government final
consumption, gross fixed capital formation, changes in inventories, and imports and exports of goods and services.
Gross Income Gross receipts of the taxpayer derived from a trade, business or services, including interest, dividends, royalties, rentals, fees or
otherwise.
Gross Income, In some countries income taxes are levied on gross income (usually at low rates) without deduction for expenses.
Taxes on
Gross Margin Ratio of gross profits to gross revenue.
Gross Profits The gross profits from a business transaction are the amount computed by deducting from the gross receipts of the transaction the
allocable purchases or production costs of sales, with due adjustment for increases or decreases in inventory or stock-in-trade, but
without taking account of other expenses.
Gross Profit Ratio of gross profit to the sales of a business or, alternatively, to the adjusted purchases or "goods consumed" during the
Ratio accounting period.
Gross Profit Tax imposed usually at low rates on the gross receipts of a business.
Tax
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 140

[Page 141]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Guarantee A written promise to pay another party’s debt or perform their contractual obligations if that party fails to pay or perform.
Head Office Where an enterprise with its head office in one country operates through an entity in another country, some expenses incurred by the
Expenses head office, e.g. for general management and administrative expenses or the cost of specific services provided to the entity, may be
deducted in computing the taxable profits of that entity.
Hedging Transaction where a person tries to protect himself against price, interest rate or foreign exchange rate fluctuations, for example, by
Transaction buying or selling commodities or currencies using derivative contracts such as forwards, futures, options and swaps.
High value Generally, semi-precious stones (agate, gem garnet), corundum, copper, lead, zinc, asbestos (chrysotile variety) and mica.
minerals158
Import duties Duty tax applied to the import of products.
Imputed Implied interest. In a mortgage that states an insufficient interest rate, tax law will impute a higher rate and a lower principal, which
Interest will increase taxes on the receipt of payment.
Income Statement showing the results of a business operation for a particular period of time. The statement will show the business's
Statement revenues and expenses.
Indirect Cost Costs that cannot be identified in relation to a particular activity but that, nevertheless, are related to the direct costs (e.g. overhead
expenses, costs of supporting departments, and a proper share of research and development (R&D) costs).
Indirect Tax Tax imposed on certain transactions, goods or events. Examples include VAT, sales tax, excise duties, stamp duty, services tax,
registration duty and transaction t
Internal rate of A rate at which the accounting value of a security is equal to the present value of the future cash flow.
return (IRR)
158 Government of India, Ministry of Mines, Press Release, No. 3/1/2005-MVI, 17 August 2009.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 141

[Page 142]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Instrument A legal document that records an act or agreement and provides the evidence of that act or agreement. Instruments include
contracts, notes, and leases (e.g. a debt instrument).
Intangible Property which has no physical existence but which has a value based on a legal right of the owner, e.g. goodwill, patent, trade mark,
Property copyright, software, inventions, designs, i.e. all manner of intellectual property. Intangible property is usually transferred by way of a
licensing agreement, and payments for the intangible are made in the form of royalties
Intercompany Transactions between members of an affiliated group filing a consolidated return; gain or loss is deferred until a property is disposed
Transactions of outside the group.
Intra-Group Services provided by a group company to another affiliated company. The cost of general services such as management,
Services administrative and similar services may be often allocated among the various members of the group without any profit mark-up,
whereas services performed in the ordinary course of business are subject to arm's length conditions.
Investment Allowance with respect to a qualifying depreciable asset. It adds a certain percentage of the asset's initial cost to the full
Allowance depreciation write-off and is usually given in the year of acquisition or as soon as possible thereafter.
Lien A charge against property, making it security for the payment of a debt, judgment, mortgage, or taxes.
Life-of-mine Number of years that the operation is planning to mine and treat ore, and is taken from the current mine plan.
(LOM)
Long-term The rates of interest or the yield on interest-bearing financial assets with a relatively long period to maturity, for which the yield on
interest rates government bonds with a maturity of ten years, are often used as a benchmark.
Losses The term may broadly be defined as the excess of expenses over revenues for a period, or the excess of the cost of assets over the
proceeds when the assets are sold or otherwise disposed of, or abandoned or destroyed.
Loss Relief Most income tax laws provide some form of relief for losses incurred, either by carrying over the loss to offset it against profits in
previous years (carry-back) or in future years (carry-forward) or by setting off the loss against other income of the same taxpayer in
the year in which the loss was incurred.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 142

[Page 143]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Management Broadly, a fee or charge imposed for management and/or administrative services of a parent company or head office.
Fee
MEDA Mining Exploration and Development Agreements. MEDAs are widely used arrangements for mineral exploration and production.
Medium value Generally, chromite, manganese ore, kyanite, sillimanite, vermiculite, magnesite, wollastonite, perlite, diaspore, apatite and rock
minerals159 phosphate, fluorite (fluorspar) and barytes.
Mine-head The value of the ore at the first point at which the ore could be stockpiled once extracted from the mine.
value
Mine mouth The place at which minerals leave a mine.
Mineral Regular payments, usually based on the volume or price of minerals extracted, made by mining enterprises to national states or
Royalties other owners of mineral resources as consideration for the right to exploit particular mineral resources.
Minimum tax In certain countries corporations are always liable to a certain amount of annual tax, regardless of whether they have realized a
profit.
MMDA The Model Mining Development Agreement. The MMDA was developed in 2010 by the International Bar Association and is intended
to be a form of model mining agreement. It provides representative language for the provisions commonly found in a mining
development agreement, with example clauses taken from existing agreements.
Mutual A means through which tax administrations consult to resolve disputes regarding the application of double tax conventions. This
Agreement procedure described and authorized by Article 25 of the OECD Model Tax Convention, can be used to eliminate double taxation that
Procedure could arise from a transfer pricing adjustment.
Netback A royalty calculated as a percentage of a value derived by deducting from the sale value of the resource, the costs incurred between
royalty the point of sale, and a point earlier in the process.
159 Government of India, Ministry of Mines, Press Release, No. 3/1/2005-MVI, 17 August 2009.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 143

[Page 144]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Net Income Net income is gross income less deductible income-related expenses. Many countries levy income tax on this basis.
Net Operating Amounts by which business expenses exceed income in a tax year. A trader's operating losses constitute broadly the excess of his
Loss operating expenditure over receipts from his operations.
Operating Lease where the lessor is regarded as the owner of the leased asset for tax purposes. Contrast with a Finance Lease.
Lease
Overhead The general expenses of a business as opposed to the direct cost of producing a good or service.
Expenses
Ore Rock, generally containing metallic or non-metallic minerals that can be mined and processed at a profit.
Penalties Administrative penalties are imposed for tax offences, such as failure to make a timely return or payment, negligence, and making a
false return or statement. They take the form of additions to the tax and are assessed as part of the tax.
Pool Basis Collective basis for the purpose of depreciation of business assets falling within the same category. For example, all depreciable
assets of a similar kind are effectively treated as a single asset for depreciation purposes.
Precious Includes gold, silver, diamond, ruby, sapphire and emerald.
metals and
stones
Production The commercial exploitation of minerals found in an authorised contract area, specifically the operation that brings minerals to the
surface and prepares them for processing, but more generally may be considered to include all incidental activities, including the
design, construction, installation, operation and maintenance of any plant and infrastructure and the mining, processing, stockpiling,
transportation, export and sale of products. This phase may also be referred to as exploitation or development
Production Typically found in the petroleum industry where production at the surface is shared between a State and a private contractor.
sharing
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 144

[Page 145]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Progression Where the rates of income tax are usually progressive, i.e. an increasing proportion of income must be paid in tax as the income
increases and at potentially higher rates.
Provision This is amount that is calculated and deducted from accounting profits or reserves for an enterprise. Provisions are measured at the
(Accounting) best estimate (including risks and uncertainties) of the expenditure required to settle the present obligation, and reflects the present
value of expenditures required to settle the obligation where the time value of money is material.
Rare earth A set of 17 chemical elements that are typically dispersed and not often found in concentrated and economically exploitable
metals deposits: scandium (Sc), yttrium (Y), lanthanum (La), cerium (Ce), praseodymium (Pr), neodymium (Nd), promethium (Pm), samarium
(Sm), europium (Eu), gadolinium (Gd), terbium (Tb), dysprosium (dy), holmium (Ho), erbium (Er), thulium (Tm), ytterbium (Yb), and
lutetium (Lu).
Recovery The percentage of valuable metal that is recovered from the ore.
Refining The final stage of metal production in which impurities are removed from molten metal.
Rehabilitation The process of restoring mined land to allow an appropriate post mining use.
Return on The income that an investment produces for each unit (e.g. dollar) of capital invested. For example, if $1 million invested produces
investment $100,000 the next year that is a 10 per cent return on investment.
Ring Fence Theoretical enclosure established by tax legislation around certain profits, losses, transactions or groups of transactions in order to
isolate them for tax purposes.
Royalty a payment by the mining company to the state, representing the landowner’s share of the value of minerals produced on a property.
It is commonly a fractional share of the net market value.
Sales Tax Tax imposed as a percentage of the price of goods (and sometimes services). The tax is generally paid by the buyer but the seller is
responsible for collecting and remitting the tax to the tax authorities.
Sovereign The legal doctrine that a state cannot be sued without its consent. The extent a state is immune within its own jurisdiction varies
according to country, while principles of international law exempt states from legal proceedings in another country. However, if states
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 145

[Page 146]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Immunity are acting as contracting bodies, sovereign immunity may not be available in an international or foreign court. In addition, a state
may elect to waive this immunity when negotiating a contract.
Stabilisation In the context of mining contracts, a stabilisation clause seeks to address a party’s concerns that the state may, in future, reverse
policies upon which the agreement was entered into; for example, the taxation regime. The clause attempts to maintain the original
contract equilibrium.
Surface Rent An amount payable for use of land, based on a flat rate per unit of measurement.
Tangible Property with a physical form, e.g. personal property, real property as distinguished from intangible property.
Property
Taxable Base The thing or amount on which the tax rate is applied, e.g. corporate income, personal income, real property.
Taxable Event Term used to define an occurrence which affects the liability of a person to tax.
Tax Holiday A government incentive programme that offers a tax reduction or elimination to businesses for a certain period of time. Tax holidays
are commonly used by governments in developing countries to help stimulate foreign investment.
Thin A company is said to be "thinly capitalised" when its equity capital is small in comparison to its debt capital.
Capitalisation
Transaction Tax that uses a specific type of transaction as its object, e.g. sales tax, immovable property transfer tax, etc.
Taxes
Transfer A transfer price is the price charged by a company for goods, services or intangible property to a subsidiary or other related company.
Pricing Abusive transfer pricing occurs when income and expenses are improperly allocated for the purpose of reducing taxable income.
Transfer Adjustment made by the tax authorities after making a determination that a transfer price in a controlled transaction between
Pricing associated enterprises is incorrect or where an allocation of profits fails to conform to the arm's length principle.
Adjustment
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 146

[Page 147]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Uplift An addition to a tax deduction for the cost of an asset or an addition to the amount of a loss carried forward.
Upstream The exploration and production phases of the mining industry.
Valuation A point in the downstream process used for the purposes of assessing and calculating a value base for royalty purposes or taxing
point point for profit purposes.
Value added Specific type of turnover tax levied at each stage in the production and distribution process. Although VAT ultimately bears on
tax individual consumption of goods or services, liability for VAT is on the supplier of goods or services. VAT normally utilizes a system of
tax credits to place the ultimate and real burden of the tax on the final consumer and to relieve the intermediaries of any final tax
cost.
Withholding Tax on income imposed at source, i.e. a third party is charged with the task of deducting the tax from certain kinds of payments and
Tax remitting that amount to the government. Withholding taxes are found in practically all tax systems and are widely used in respect of
dividends, interest, royalties and similar tax payments. The rates of withholding tax are frequently reduced by tax treaties.
World-wide Criterion for the income tax liability of a resident company or individual of a certain country. In many countries a resident company or
Income individual is subject to corporate/individual income tax on its worldwide income, subject to double taxation relief.
Working Funds invested in a company's cash, accounts receivable, inventory, and other current assets (gross working capital). The term
Capital usually refers to net working capital, that is, current asset minus current liabilities.
Written-down The value of an asset which is depreciable for income tax purposes, determined by deducting from the total cost, including
Value installation, etc. the deduction that have been made for wear and tear or depreciation in previous tax years.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 147

[Page 148]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Annexure – useful information
1. International reference pricing
2. Types of additional, rent-style taxes
3. Selected recommendations from the AFTS Final Report
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 148

[Page 149]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
International reference pricing:160 from copper prices is traditionally determined
in negotiations between copper concentrate
“Copper:
producers and smelters. Transportation costs
might also have to be deducted to get the price
World copper markets are London Metal
of copper concentrate. There seem to be
Exchange (LME) and New York Merchantile
several distortions in world markets.
Exchange (NYMEX). The more quoted spot
reference price comes from LME: the cash
Zinc Concentrate:
seller and settlement spot price for copper
grade A. The main world reference spot price for zinc is
the LME, high grade 98 percent pure zinc
Copper Concentrate:
price, cif, UK ports. As in the case of copper,
the spot cash seller and settlement price can
The value of copper concentrate can be
be specifically used as the reference price of
obtained by subtracting the treatment and
zinc. It is not easy to find references to markets
refining charges (TC and RC) from the
for zinc TC/RC. A 2005 report on zinc markets
(refined) copper price. There are spot and
in Asia-Pacific suggested that zinc smelters
annual TC/RC markets in Japan and a spot
and zinc mines negotiate base TC/RC once a
market in Shanghai. The annual market
year, with actual TC/RC being determined by
includes a price participation (PP) element by
the base TC/RC plus/minus 15% of zinc-price
which smelters share part of increases in
changes from the base zinc price.
copper prices. There can be sizable
differences between the prices quoted in the
Lead:
annual and spot markets, which suggests that
the impact of imposing a uniform reference tax LME has a 99.97 percent minimum purity lead
price to all transactions would be significant. spot price, cif for European ports. Cash seller
The equilibrium in the refined copper market is and settlement price.
the one that drives both products. The netback
Nickel:
160 Extracted from Sunley EM, Gottschalk J & LME, primary nickel of 99.8 percent minimum
Watson A, International Monetary Fund, Fiscal purity, spot price. Cash seller and settlement
Affairs Department Mongolia: The Fiscal Regime for
price”.
Mining – A Way Forward 22 June 2010 at Appendix
2.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 149

[Page 150]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Types of additional, rent-style taxes161 forward. A drawback of the RRT is that it does An important additional feature of the
not produce revenue until the required rate of Australian RSPT proposal is that the
“Resource rent tax return has been earned and therefore may not government would guarantee that the investor
produce revenue for the government if mineral would receive the tax benefit (in effect a tax
The RRT is a proportional tax on discounted
prices spike and companies report high profits deduction) for all expenditure. This would
cash flow returns to total project outlays, in
to their shareholders, but the project has not mean for a project which failed to reach the
excess of a predetermined percentage rate.
yet reached the threshold rate of return. bond rate of return, the government would
The predetermined rate is intended to
However, such a price spike would bring make a payment to the investor equal to the
represent a “minimum” required rate of return
forward the point at which the threshold would accumulated balance of any losses plus bond
on a new project in the mining sector. For tax
be reached and RRT would be paid. rate interest. The government is therefore
calculation purposes the rate is sometimes
taking a significant amount of risk in the project
called an “accumulation rate.” The RRT is Resource Super Profits Tax
alongside the investor, even though it does not
designed as a way for the government to
pay its share up front. This approach, and the
capture “resource rent,” meaning the surplus Australia has recently proposed a RSPT for
appropriateness of the bond rate as the
over all necessary capital and current costs of mining and petroleum. The RSPT has some
accumulation rate, depends very much on the
production including a reasonable return to the similarities to the RRT, but with important
credibility of the government guarantee for the
capital invested in the project. The RRT can be differences. Instead of cash flow accounting
payout, and is unlikely to be workable in
applied after the CIT (in which case CIT paid is (i.e., expensing of capital), the base of the
environments where investors perceive any
treated as a cash outflow) or before (in which RSPT would be similar to the income tax
material political risk; indeed it remains highly
case RRT paid is a deductible in calculating base—capital assets would be depreciated. In
controversial in Australia and is by no means
the CIT). A RRT was recently introduced in addition to allowing a deduction for
certain of being adopted without modification.
Liberia for mining, and is also used in depreciation and other costs, there would be
petroleum elsewhere (e.g., Angola, Australia an allowance equal to the government bond Excess profit tax based on Payback Ratio or
and other countries). rate (around 6 percent) for undepreciated “R Factor”
capital and any unutilized losses. Only the
Some suggest that the RRT is difficult to return in excess of the bond rate would be The tax base for an excess profit tax would be
administer. However, all the numbers required taxed under the RSPT. The RSPT is taxable income for purposes of the CIT less
for the RRT are required for the regular CIT economically equivalent to the RRT, except it the income tax liability. The rate of the excess
calculation. The RRT calculations are straight would be more likely to generate tax payments profit tax would depend on the R-Factor or
when a project earns a high rate of return in Payback Ratio; namely the ratio of the
161 Extracted from Sunley EM, Gottschalk J & the current year even though the project has company’s cumulative gross receipts to the
Watson A, International Monetary Fund, Fiscal
not earned the pre-determined internal rate of company’s cumulative gross outlays, which will
Affairs Department Mongolia: The Fiscal Regime for
Mining – A Way Forward 22 June 2010 at Appendix return. include payments of the CIT if the calculation is
3.
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 150

[Page 151]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
to be made on an after-tax basis. When the The variable income tax was initially designed Thus a portion of pre-tax income (P) is taxed at
ratio is less than one, payback has not been to encourage the mining of low grade ores the rate t and a portion is taxed at the higher
reached; as it grows to a greater multiple of which would otherwise be uneconomic. It also rate k. Once a company has recovered all its
one, the excess profit tax rate increases. has the property that a mine which proves to capital costs, all pre-tax profits would be taxed
have a relatively low ratio of profit to revenue at the higher rate, k. The average tax rate
The R Factor differs from the rate of return
will bear a lower tax burden; for some investors would increase through the life of a project, or
method in that it does not take explicit account
this possibility could reduce perceived risk and if commodity prices rose”.
of the time value of money. Whether the ratio
thus encourage investment. If required, the
increases quickly or slowly does not matter in
formula can be designed so that, on average
the calculation, the same excess profit tax rate
across the mining sector, the effect of the tax is
is still triggered.
the same as the standard rate of income tax.
Variable income tax
Bougainville additional profit tax
The gold mining tax regime in South Africa for
The “Bougainville” additional profit tax is similar
many years incorporated a formula that
to a variable income tax, as the effective tax
determined the tax rate each year and was
rate varies with the level of profitability. The
designed to impose a lower-than-average rate
level of profitability is a snap shot taken each
of tax in years of poor relative profitability offset
year. It does not require measuring the internal
by a higher-than-average rate of tax in years of
rate of return earned on the project.
high relative profitability. The variable income
tax retains all the other features of the regular Earnings up to a threshold value are taxed at
income tax, including the special capital the normal rate (t). Earnings in excess of the
recovery rules for investments in the mining threshold are taxed at a higher rate (k). The
sector; it only adjusts the tax rate. The South threshold is determined by multiplying the
African system was also adapted for use in the unrecovered capital cost (C) by a required rate
mining tax legislation of Namibia for non- of return (x). As the required rate of return is
diamond mines. The variable rate in Namibia assumed to be an after-tax rate of return, the
was repealed in 2002 and replaced with a flat threshold is grossed up by a factor (1 – t).52
rate of 37.5 percent (compared to the standard The total tax comprises two pieces, assuming
rate of 35 percent). A variable income tax was pre-tax income (P) exceeds the grossed up
introduced in Botswana in 1998. threshold, as follows:
Total tax = tCx/(1-t) + k(P – Cx/(1-t)).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 151

[Page 152]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Selected recommendations from the (e) allows losses to be carried forward with
AFTS Final Report162 interest or transferred to other commonly
owned projects, with the tax value of residual
Recommendation 45: losses refunded when a project is closed; and
The current resource charging arrangements (f) is allowed as a deductible expense in the
imposed on non-renewable resources by the calculation of income tax, with loss refunds
Australian and State governments should be treated as assessable income.
replaced by a uniform resource rent tax
imposed and administered by the Australian Recommendation 46:
government that:
The resource rent tax should not provide
(a) is levied at a rate of 40 per cent, with that concessions to encourage exploration or
rate adjusted to offset any future change in the production activity at a faster rate than the
company income tax rate from 25 per cent, to commercial rate or in particular geographical
achieve a combined statutory tax rate of 55 per areas, and should not allow deductions above
cent; acquisition costs to stimulate investment.
(b) applies to non-renewable resource (oil, gas Recommendation 49:
and minerals) projects, except for lower value
The Australian and State governments should
minerals for which it can be expected to
consider using a cash bidding system to
generate no net benefits. Excepted minerals
allocate exploration permits. For small
could continue to be subject to existing
exploration areas, where there are unlikely to
arrangements if appropriate;
be net benefits from a cash bidding system, a
(c) measures rents as net income less an first-come first-served system could be used.
allowance for corporate capital, with the
allowance rate set at the long-term Australian
government bond rate;
(d) requires a rent calculation for projects;
162 Commonwealth of Australia Australia’s Future
Tax System, Report to the Treasurer (2010).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 152

[Page 153]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Annexure - Bibliography & websites
153

[Page 154]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Bibliography Daniel P Fiscal Regimes for Natural Resources: Deloitte Tracking the trends 2013: the top 10
Basics, Mining, Petroleum Workshop, Manila 3 issues mining companies may face in the
Allen & Overy Guide to Extractive Industries October 2012. company year 2012.
Documents –Mining January 2013.
Chen D & Mintz J Capturing Economic Rents EITI Advancing the EITI in the Mining Sector:
ANC Maximising the Developmental Impact of from Resources Through Royalties and Taxes A consultation with stakeholders EITI 2009.
the People’s Mineral Assets: State Intervention The School of Public Policy, University of
EY Business risks facing mining and metals
in the Minerals Sector (SIMS) Policy Discussion Calgary, SPP Research Papers, Volume 5,
2013-2014 (2013).
Document March 2012. Issue 30, October 2012.
EY Global oil and gas tax guide 2012.
Arnold J “Improving the Tax System in Chen D & Mintz J Repairing Canada’s Mining-
Indonesia”, OECD Economics Department Tax System to be Less Distorting and Complex EY Worldwide R&D incentives reference guide
Working Papers, No. 998, OECD Publishing Vol 6, Issue 18, May 2013, The School of 2013–2014 March 2013.
(2012). Public Policy, SPP Research Papers, University
EY 2013 Asia-Pacific R&D incentives.
of Calgary.
Baker & McKenzie Latin American Mining
Ernst & Young Mongolia Mining and Tax Guide
Handbook – 2013. Chen D & Mintz J 2013 Annual Global Tax
2012/2013.
Competitiveness Ranking: Corporate Tax Policy
Baker & McKenzie New Caledonia Investment
at a Crossroads Vol 6, Issue 35, November Gajigo O, Mutambatsere E & Ndiaye G “Royalty
Guide 2013.
2013, The School of Public Policy, SPP Rates in African Mining Revisited: Evidence
Barbier EB “Protect the deep sea” 505 Nature Research Papers, University of Calgary. from Gold Mining” Africa Economic Brief, Vol 3
(2014) 475-477. Issue 6, African Development Fund, June
Commonwealth of Australia Australia’s Future
2012.
Baunsgaard T “A Primer on Mineral Taxation” Tax System, Report to the Treasurer (2010).
IMF Working Paper, WP/01/139, September Gouvernement du Québec A New Mining Tax
Commonwealth of Australia, Issues Paper
2001. Regime Fair for All May 2013.
Technical Design of the Minerals Resource
Buchanan D Analysis of reported actual and Rent Tax Transitioning existing petroleum Guj P Mining Royalties and other mining-
direct exploration expenditure by contractors projects to the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax specific taxes International Mining for
with the International Seabed Authority and Policies to promote exploration Development Centre (2012).
Imperial College London, March 2011. expenditure, Policy Transition Group, 1
Guj P, Bocoum B, Limerick J, Meaton M &
October 2010.
Cawood FT & Oshokoya OP “Considerations for Maybee B How to Improve Mining Tax
the resource nationalism debate: a plausible Deloitte Country Tax Guides – various. Administration and Collection Frameworks: A
way forward for mining taxation in South Sourcebook World Bank, April 2013.
Deloitte Economic Access The first six months
Africa” The Journal of The Southern African
of MRRT tax take – how would it have differed Heidrich P Tax regimes on mining in Latin
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy January
under RSPT? 15 April 2013. America The North-South Institute September
2013.
2013.
154

[Page 155]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
ICMM Independent report on biodiversity ISA Environmental Management of Deep-Sea Keen M Taxation and Development – Again
offsets January 2013. Chemosynthetic Ecosystems: Justification of IMF Working Paper WP/12/220 September
and Considerations for a Spatially-Based 2012.
ICMM The Challenge of Mineral Wealth: using
Approach, ISA Technical Study No. 9.
resource endowments to foster sustainable KPMG Country Mining Guide Mozambique
development. Minerals Taxation Regimes, A ISA Environmental Management Needs for 2013.
review of issues and challenges in their design Exploration and Exploitation of Deep Sea
KPMG Country Mining Guide Peru 2013.
and application: Analysis and observations Minerals Report of a workshop held by The
(2009). International Seabed Authority in collaboration KPMG Country Mining Guide Zambia 2013.
with the Government of Fiji and the SOPAC
ICMM Trends in the mining and metals KPMG A Guide to Canadian Mining Taxation
Division of the Secretariat of the Pacific
industry: Mining’s contribution to sustainable September 2011.
Community (SPC) in Nadi, Fiji, from 29
development, October 2012.
November to 2 December 2011 ISA Technical KPMG Mining financial reporting survey 2012.
IMF, Board Paper on the Taxation of Natural Study: No. 10.
Lund D “Rent Taxation for Non-renewable
Resource Rents, Issues for Consultation, Fiscal
ISA Polymetallic Nodule Mining Technology: Resources” 2009 Annual Review of Resource
Affairs Department, 2012.
Current Status and Challenges Ahead: Economics Vol. 1: 287-308.
IMF Country Report No. 14/7, Uruguay, Proceedings of the Workshop jointly organized
Lundstol O, Raballand G & Nyirongo F Low
January 2014. by the International Seabed Authority and the
Government Revenue from the Mining Sector
Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of Indi
IMF Fiscal Monitor October 2013. in Zambia and Tanzania ICTD Working Paper
a, National Institute of Ocean Technology, Che
9, April 2013.
IMF “Fiscal Regimes for Extractive Industries: nnai, India 18 to 22 February 2008.
Design and Implementation” Prepared by the Lynch P “Towards The Development Of A
ISA Implementation of Article 82 of the United
Fiscal Affairs Department, 15 August 2012. National Regulatory Framework For Deep Sea
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ISA
Mining In The Cook Islands” October 2011.
IMF Guide on Resource Revenue Transparency Technical Study: No. 12, 2013.
April 2007. Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment
ISA Secretary-General’s Informal Consultations
Review of the royalty regime for minerals
IMF Managing Natural Resource Wealth on outstanding issues relating to the deep
Discussion Paper October 2012.
(MNRW-TTF) Program Document November seabed mining provisions of the United Nations
2010. Convention on the Law of the Sea: Collected Ministry of Economic Development (NZ)
Documents ISA, 2002. Review of the Crown Minerals Act 1991
IMF Philippines: Reform of the Fiscal Regime
Regime Discussion Paper March 2012.
for Mining and Petroleum, IMF Country Report ISA Towards the Development of a Regulatory
no. 12/219, August 2012. Framework for Polymetallic Nodule Exploitation Mintz J & Chen D Capturing Economic Rents
in the Area, Technical Study: No. 11, 2013 from Resources Through Royalties and Taxes
ISA Documents / Publications:
The School of Public Policy, University of
ISA Analysis of reported expenditure by Calgary, SPP Research Papers, Volume 5,
contractors ISBA/17/LTC/L.2, 18 May 2011. Issue 30, October 2012.
155

[Page 156]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Mitchell P EITI Advancing the EITI in the PWC Corporate income taxes, mining royalties Richardson D Submission on mining taxation
Mining Sector: Taxation and Investment Issues and To the Select Committee on New Taxes The
in Mining, Chapter 4, 2009. other mining taxes: A summary of rates and Australia Institute.
rules in selected countries June 2012.
Natural Resource Charter, The November 2010 Smith B The Impossibility of a Neutral
PWC Digging Deeper: Canadian mining Resource Rent Tax Working Papers in
New Zealand Review of the Crown Minerals Act
taxation 2011. Economics and Econometrics No 380,
1991 Regime March 2012.
Australian National University, September
PWC Doing Business Guide Kazakhstan
OECD Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit 1999.
1 October 2012.
Shifting OECD Publishing 2013.
Smith JL “Issues in Extractive Resource
PWC Financial reporting in the mining industry:
Otto JM Expert Opinion on Mine Taxation Taxation: A Review of Research Methods and
International Financial Reporting Standards 6th
Pertinent to the Sheshinski Committee II for Models” IMF Working Paper, WP/12/287,
edition, November 2012.
the Review of Policy with Respect to Royalties December 2012.
on Natural Resources formed by the Israeli PWC Mine A confidence crisis 2013.
Sarma JVM and Naresh G “Mineral Taxation
Ministry of Finance 4 November 2013.
PWC Oil and gas exploration in Ireland May around the World: Trends and Issues” Asia
Otto J et al Mining royalties : a global study of 2013. Pacific Tax Bulletin January 2001 2-10.
their impact on investors, government, and
PWC Maximising your returns Tax issues for Sunley EM & Baunsgaard T “The Tax
civil society The World Bank (2006).
the exploration and production of Irish oil and Treatment of the Mining Sector: An IMF
Otto J Mining Taxation in Developing Countries gas, March 2013. Perspective” April 2001.
Study prepared for UNCTAD, November 2000.
PWC Mining in Indonesia: investment and Sunley EM, Gottschalk J & Watson A,
Otto J Position of the Peruvian Taxation taxation guide 4th edition April 2012. International Monetary Fund, Fiscal Affairs
System as Compared to Mining Taxation Department Mongolia: The Fiscal Regime for
PWC Mining in the Americas 2012.
Systems in Other Nations Prepared for: Mining – A Way Forward 22 June 2010.
Ministry of Economy and Finance March 2002. PWC Oil and gas tax guide for Africa 2013
Spratt S Environmental taxation&
2013.
Otto J Resource Nationalism and Regulatory development: a scoping study ICTD June
Reform RMMLF Special Institute on PWC Tax transparency and country-by-country 2012.
International Mining and Oil & Gas Cartagena reporting October 2013.
Stevens P, Kooroshy J, Lahn G and Lee B
de Indias, Colombia April 22-24, 2013.
Quisumbing Torres Primer on the Philippine Conflict and Coexistence in the Extractive
PWC Comparative Mining Tax Regimes 1998 Minerals Industry 2012. Industries A Chatham House Report,
PWC Income taxes, mining taxes and mining November 2013.
Republic of South Africa Draft Explanatory
royalties: A summary of selected countries
Memorandum for the Mineral and Petroleum Thomas S “Mining Taxation: An Application to
2010.
Resources royalty Bill, 2007 6 December 2007. Mali” IMF Working Paper, WP/10/126, May
2010.
156

[Page 157]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
U.S. Geological Survey Mineral Commodity Mines and Minerals Act 1999 (Botswana). African National Congress
Summaries January 2013. http://www.anc.org.za/index.php
Mines and Minerals Development Act 2008
Yamasaki T Model mining units of the 20th (Zambia). Australia’s Future Tax System
century and the economies Technical paper for http://taxreview.treasury.gov.au/Content/Cont
Mining Act Bill 43 (National Assembly,
ISA Workshop on Polymetallic Nodule Mining ent.aspx?doc=html/home.htm
Quebec).
Technology - Current Status and Challenges
Australian Mining
Ahead- Feb. 18-22, 2008, Chennai, India. [Quebec Bill 55]
http://www.miningaustralia.com.au/home
World Economic Forum Responsible Mineral Mining Regulations 1981 (Western Australia)
Cook Islands Seabed Minerals Authority
Development Initiative 2011.
Minerals Resource Rent Tax Act 2012 http://www.seabedmineralsauthority.gov.ck/
Legislation / legal / accounting / cases (Australia).
Direction des Services Fiscaux
Agreement relating to the implementation of Mineral Royalty Act 1982 (Northern Territory). http://www.dsf.gouv.nc/portal/page/portal/dsf
Part XI of the United Nations Convention on
Offshore Minerals (Royalty) Act 1981 EISourcebook http://www.eisourcebook.org/
the Law of the sea of 10 December 1982,
(Australia).
A/Res/48/263, 17 August 1994. EY Metals & Mining
Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for http://www.ey.com/UK/en/Industries/Mining---
Cook Islands Model Seabed Minerals
Polymetallic Nodules in the Area, Metals
Agreement.
ISBA/19/C/17, 22 July 2013.
Ghana Revenue Authority
Income Tax Act 1995 (Botswana).
Seabed Minerals (Royalties) Regulations 2013 http://www.gra.gov.gh/index.php
Income Tax Amendment Act 2006 (Botswana). (Cook Islands).
Global Environment Facility
Income Tax Act 2007 (New Zealand). The Minerals and Mining Act, 2006 (Ghana). http://www.thegef.org/gef/home
Income Tax Amendment Act 2014 (Cook United Nations Convention on the Law of the Gouvernement de la Nouvelle-Calédonie
Islands). Sea, 10 December 1982. http://www.gouv.nc/portal/page/portal/gouv
Income Tax Amendment No 3 Bill 2013 Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International Government of South Australia
(Tonga). Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, http://outernode.pir.sa.gov.au/minerals/licensi
Responsibilities and Obligations of States ng_and_regulation/resource_royalties/mineral_
IFRS 6 Exploration for and evaluation of
Sponsoring Persons and Entities with Respect royalties#prescribed
mineral resources 1 January 2012.
to Activities in the Area, Advisory Opinion, List
Government of Western Australia, Department
International Seabed Mineral management of cases: No. 17, 1 February 2011.
of Mines and Petroleum
Decree 2013, Decree No 21 of 2013,
Websites http://www.dmp.wa.gov.au/4407.aspx#1551
Government of Fiji Gazette, 12 July 2013.
No. 28 of 2008: Mineral and Petroleum African Economic Outlook
Resources Royalty Act, 2008 (South Africa). http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/
157

[Page 158]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Incoterms 2010 Ministry of Taxation (Denmark) U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity
http://www.iccwbo.org/products-and- http://www.skm.dk/foreign/ Summaries
services/trade-facilitation/incoterms-2010/
Natural Resources Canada http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/comm
International Monetary Fund http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/mining- odity/
http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/key/fiscal. materials/taxation/8876
htm World Bank GDP Ranking
Northern Territory Government
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/GDP-
KPMG Corporate Tax Rates 2005-2013 http://www.treasury.nt.gov.au/TaxesRoyalties
ranking-table
http://www.kpmg.com/global/en/services/tax/t AndGrants/Royalties/Pages/default.aspx
ax-tools-and-resources/pages/corporate-tax-
OECD http://www.oecd.org/
rates-table.aspx
OECD Environmental Taxation
KPMG Global Mining Institute
http://www.oecd.org/env/tools-
http://www.kpmg.com/Global/en/industry/mini
evaluation/environmentaltaxation.htm
ng/Pages/default.aspx?utm_medium=mdd&ut
m_campaign=mdd- Oil and Mining Contracts
global&utm_source=feature http://www.resourcecontracts.org/
Lexology http://www.lexology.com/ Parliament of Australia
http://www.aph.gov.au/
Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative http://www.leiti.org.lr/contracts-and- Queensland Government
concessions.html https://www.osr.qld.gov.au/royalties/rates.sht
ml
London Metal Exchange
http://www.lme.com/en-gb/ PWC Global Mining Publications
http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/mining/publication
Mining Weekly http://www.miningweekly.com/
s/index.jhtml
Ministry of Finance (Norway)
PwC's Worldwide Tax Summaries Online
http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/fin/Selecte
http://taxsummaries.pwc.com/uk/taxsummarie
d-topics/taxes-and-
s/wwts.nsf/ID/PPAA-85RDKF
duties/bedriftsbeskatning/taxation-of-
petroleum-activities.html?id=417318 Revenue Watch Institute
http://www.revenuewatch.org/
Ministry of Finance and Economic Management
(Cook Islands) Tax-News.com http://www.tax-news.com/
http://www.mfem.gov.ck/seabed-mining-tax
The Australia Institute http://www.tai.org.au/
Ministry of Mines (India) http://mines.nic.in/
158

[Page 159]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
Annexure - Miscellaneous data
1. Mine production – 2012
2. GDPs - 2012
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 159

[Page 160]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. Mine Production - 2012163
Metric tons
Copper Country Rank 000s % Cum %
Chile 1 5,370 32.3% 32.3%
China 2 1,500 9.0% 41.3%
Peru 3 1,240 7.5% 48.8%
USA 4 1,150 6.9% 55.7%
Australia 5 970 5.8% 61.6%
Russia 6 720 4.3% 65.9%
Zambia 7 675 4.1% 70.0%
Congo, DR 8 580 3.5% 73.5%
Canada 9 530 3.2% 76.6%
Mexico 10 500 3.0% 79.7%
Indonesia 11 430 2.6% 82.2%
Poland 12 430 2.6% 84.8%
Kazakhstan 13 420 2.5% 87.4%
Other 2,100 12.6% 100.0%
World Total 16,615 100.0%
163 Source: U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries, January 2013
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 160

[Page 161]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. Mine Production - 2012
Metric tons
Manganese Country Rank 000s % Cum %
South Africa 1 3,500 20.8% 20.8%
Australia 2 3,400 20.2% 41.0%
China 3 3,000 17.8% 58.8%
Gabon 4 2,000 11.9% 70.7%
Brazil 5 1,100 6.5% 77.2%
India 6 810 4.8% 82.0%
Kazakhstan 7 390 2.3% 84.3%
Ukraine 8 310 1.8% 86.2%
Myanmar 9 230 1.4% 87.5%
Malaysia 10 230 1.4% 88.9%
Mexico 11 170 1.0% 89.9%
Other 1,700 10.1% 100.0%
World Total 16,840 100.0%
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 161

[Page 162]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. Mine Production - 2012
Country Rank Metric tons % Cum %
Cobalt
Congo 1 60,000 55.0% 55.0%
China 2 7,000 6.4% 61.4%
Canada 3 6,700 6.1% 67.6%
Russia 4 6,200 5.7% 73.2%
Australia 5 4,500 4.1% 77.4%
Brazil 6 3,700 3.4% 80.8%
Cuba 7 3,700 3.4% 84.1%
New Caledonia 8 3,500 3.2% 87.4%
Zambia 9 3,000 2.7% 90.1%
Morocco 10 1,800 1.6% 91.8%
Other 9,000 8.2% 100.0%
World Total 109,100 100.0%
Note: identified world cobalt resources: 15 million tons. USGS
estimates 1 billion tons on the ocean floor (hypothetical /
speculative).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 162

[Page 163]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. Mine Production - 2012
Country Rank Metric tons % Cum %
Nickel
Philippines 1 330,000 15.5% 15.5%
Indonesia 2 320,000 15.0% 30.6%
Russia 3 270,000 12.7% 43.3%
Australia 4 230,000 10.8% 54.1%
Canada 5 220,000 10.3% 64.4%
Brazil 6 140,000 6.6% 71.0%
New Caledonia 7 140,000 6.6% 77.6%
China 8 91,000 4.3% 81.9%
Colombia 9 80,000 3.8% 85.6%
Cuba 10 72,000 3.4% 89.0%
South Africa 11 42,000 2.0% 91.0%
Botswana 12 26,000 1.2% 92.2%
Dominican Republic 13 24,000 1.1% 93.3%
Madagascar 14 22,000 1.0% 94.4%
Other 120,000 5.6% 100.0%
World Total 2,127,000 100.0%
Note: identified land-based resources: 130 million tons (1% or greater
nickel content).
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 163

[Page 164]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. Mine Production - 2012
Country Rank Metric tons % Cum %
Zinc
China 1 4,600 35.3% 35.3%
Australia 2 1,490 11.4% 46.7%
Peru 3 1,270 9.7% 56.5%
USA 4 748 5.7% 62.2%
India 5 690 5.3% 67.5%
Canada 6 640 4.9% 72.4%
Mexico 7 630 4.8% 77.3%
Bolivia 8 430 3.3% 80.5%
Kazakhstan 9 420 3.2% 83.8%
Ireland 10 345 2.6% 86.4%
Other 1,770 13.6% 100.0%
World Total 13,033 100.0%
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 164

[Page 165]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
1. Mine Production - 2012
Country Rank Metric tons % Cum %
Silver
Mexico 1 4,250 17.7% 17.7%
China 2 3,800 15.8% 33.6%
Peru 3 3,450 14.4% 48.0%
Australia 4 1,900 7.9% 55.9%
Russia 5 1,500 6.3% 62.1%
Bolivia 6 1,300 5.4% 67.6%
Poland 7 1,170 4.9% 72.4%
Chile 8 1,130 4.7% 77.1%
USA 9 1,050 4.4% 81.5%
Canada 10 530 2.2% 83.7%
Other 3,900 16.3% 100.0%
World Total 23,980 100.0%
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 165

[Page 166]
MAKING THE MOST OF DEEP SEABED MINERAL RESOURCES
2. Gross domestic product - 2012164
Country GDP – US$m
Australia 1,532,408
Bolivia 27,035
Botswana 14,504
Brazil 2,252,664
Canada 1,821,424
Chile 269,869
China 8,227,103
Colombia 369,606
Congo DR 17,204
Dominican R epublic 59,047
Gabon 18,377 GDP –
India 1,841,710 Country US$m
Indonesia 878,043 Peru 203,790
Ireland 210,771 Philippines 250,182
Kazakhstan 203,521 Poland 489,795
Malaysia 305,033 Russian Fede ration 2,014,775
Myanmar N/A South Africa 384,313
Mexico 1,178,126 Ukraine 176,309
Morocco 95,982 USA 16,244,600
New Caledon ia N/A Zambia 20,678
164 Source: World Bank Gross Domestic Product 2012
© Copyright International Seabed Authority 2014 166