[Page 2]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
1

[Page 3]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Contents Page
Section 1 Executive summary 2
Section 2 Draft framework for the Exploitation 4
Regulations
Section 3 Summary of the response of the Legal and 39
Technical Commission to Stakeholder Survey
submissions
Section 4 Summary of high level issues 40
Section 5 Draft action plan 45
Section 6 Making a submission 52
Published March 2015 by:
International Seabed Authority
14-20 Port Royal Street
Kingston Jamaica
1

[Page 4]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Section 1: Executive summary
The purpose of this Report of the Legal and Technical Commission (the Commission) is
to respond to the Council’s decision (ISBA/20/C/31, paragraph 3) by which the Council
”requested the Commission to continue its work on the regulations governing
exploitation as a matter of priority and to make available to all members of the Authority
and all stakeholders a draft framework for the regulation of exploitation as soon as
possible after the February 2015 meeting”.
This Report attempts to demonstrate the size (both depth and breadth) of the task in
formulating rules, regulations and procedures for exploitation. It is also a statement of
progress to date and indicates the immediate next steps and actions.
The Report contains the following sections:
 Section 1: Executive summary
 Section 2: Draft framework for the Exploitation Regulations1
 Section 3: Summary of the Commission’s response to Stakeholder Survey
submissions
 Section 4: Summary of high level issues
 Section 5: Draft action plan for way forward to mid-2016.
The Report was developed and finalised for immediate circulation to Members of the
Authority and all stakeholders following the February Session of the Commission, which
was held from 16 to 27 February 2015. Stakeholder groups follow the same broad
groupings that responded to the Survey and as reported by the Commission to Council
in 2014 and are considered to include: contractors, international organizations, non-
government organizations, scientific institutions and universities, private entities, and
individuals.
Responses to this Report from Members of the Authority and all stakeholders are
invited by mid-May so that the Secretariat can prepare an update for the session of the
Commission in July 2015.
The Commission will, in its Chair’s Report to Council in July 2015: (i) provide a
summary of progress and next actions on the development of the Exploitation
Regulations and (ii) include a latest version of the Draft framework for the Exploitation
Regulations in an annex to the Chair’s Report.
1 Disclaimer: This draft regulatory framework should not to be seen as “draft regulations”. The framework is work in
progress by the Commission as it moves incrementally and in a consultative manner with Members of the Authority
and all stakeholders towards the regulations themselves.
2

[Page 5]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Section 1: Executive summary
Section 2 of this Report reflects the draft framework for the Exploitation Regulations. It
currently contains 10 parts and 2 annexes. Specifically not included at this time are 4
areas: (i) the financial and payment terms mechanism; (ii) a mining inspectorate; (iii)
revenue management by the Authority and (iv) the Enterprise. The Commission will
provide further details of possible financial and payment mechanisms to Council in July
following further consideration.2 No further work on the remaining 3 items is proposed at
this time. Additionally, the two annexes to the draft framework, addressing application
procedure and standard contract clauses, reflect 5 further issues that have been
identified for further work. These are: (i) dealings; (ii) annual reports; (iii) insurance; (iv)
suspension and termination of contracts and penalties and (v) revision.
Section 3 of this Report is a summary of the Commission’s response to the Stakeholder
Survey submissions. It further encourages responses from Members of the Authority
and all stakeholders to this Report by mid-May in order to further enrich the interactive
dialogue that is key to the successful development of the exploitation regulations.
Section 4 of this Report contains a brief commentary on 13 high level issues identified in
the responses to the Stakeholder Survey and the work of the Commission to date.
These issues must be addressed in the process of developing and finalising the
exploitation regulations. Once again feedback is being sought including: (i) on high level
issues that may have been omitted; (ii) on the brief commentary provided in regard to
each of the issues, and (iii) suggestions on the way these issues may be addressed in
the development of the regulatory framework.
Section 5 of this Report comprises a Draft action plan. The plan at this time is
considered appropriate to continue the further development of the regulations in a timely
manner. It is anticipated it will develop over time. The action plan is drawn directly from
the draft framework and actions have been prioritised according to when actions need
to be initiated. It is premature to consider that actions will be completed at this stage, as
many will be initiated and ongoing for some time.
The Commission recognises the importance of an open, transparent and inclusive
process in developing the exploitation framework and welcomes further stakeholder
feedback.
2 It is intended that a discussion paper relating to the financial mechanism be circulated before end March 2015 to all
stakeholders for comment.
3

[Page 6]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Section 2: Draft framework for the Exploitation Regulations
This Section 2 provides an outline of a suggested structure for future exploitation regulations together with a
commentary against each component element of the regulatory framework and recommended actions.
The suggested legal framework is similar to that under the current exploration regime, that is, a uniform set of headline
regulations and a standardised contract.3 The aim is to develop a legal framework that is simple with clear objectives
and endorses established principles and practice where applicable.
As noted in the Executive summary, there are four areas of the regulatory framework that are not addressed in this
Section 2, being:
1. The payment mechanism: this is under separate discussion and an update on the financial regime will be presented
at the Authority’s Annual Session in July 2015. However, a separate discussion paper on the development of a
payment mechanism will be issued by the Secretariat in advance of the Session;
2. The development and resourcing of a mining inspectorate within the Secretariat function. It is recommended that
the administrative and enforcement functions of a “typical” mining regulator, environmental management agency
and perhaps maritime security regime are benchmarked in due course;
3. Revenue management by the Authority, that is the allocation of monies received by the Authority from production
proceeds; and
4. The operation and effective participation of the Enterprise.
It is not the intention of the Commission to undertake further work in respect of 2, 3 and 4 above at this time.
3 See Article 153(3) and Annex III Article 3(5) of the Convention requiring an approved plan of work to be in the form of a contract.
4

[Page 7]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Glossary of abbreviations
APEIs Areas of particular environmental interest
BEP Best environmental practice
DSM Deep seabed mining
EIA Environmental impact assessment
EIS Environmental impact statement
EITI Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
EMP Environmental management plan
EMS Environmental management system
IRZ Impact reference zone(s)
PRZ Preservation reference zone(s)
RRPs Rules, regulations and procedures (of the
Authority)
SEIA Strategic environmental impact assessment
SEMP Strategic environmental management plan
5

[Page 8]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Suggested structure for Exploitation o Closure plan
o Size and location of exploitation area covered
Regulations
by the plan of work
Title  Fees
o Fee for applications
Preamble
 Processing of applications
 Objectives & overarching principles / purpose o Receipt, acknowledgement and safe custody of
applications
Part I – Introduction o Public review of the Environmental impact
statement and Environmental management
 Use of terms and scope
plan [and Social impact assessment and
Closure plan]
Part II – Applications for approval of plans of work for
o Consideration by the Legal and Technical
exploitation in the form of contracts
Commission
 General provisions
o Consideration and approval of plans of work for
 Content of applications exploitation by the Council
o Form of applications o Independent technical expert working group(s) /
o Certificate of sponsorship sub-committees
o Financial & technical capabilities
o Previous contracts with the Authority Part III – Contracts for exploitation
o Undertakings
o The contract
o Applications for approval of plans of work with
o Rights of the contractor
respect to a reserved area
o Obligations of the Authority
o Equity interest in a joint venture arrangement
o Legal title to minerals
o Data and information to be submitted for
o Duration of contracts / renewal
approval of the plan of work for exploitation
o Performance requirements
o Feasibility study
o Conservation of the natural resources of the Area
o Environmental impact statement
o Use of sub-contractors
o Environmental management plan
o Vessels operating in the Area
o Social impact assessment and action plan
o Protection of submarine cables and pipelines
o Financing plan
o Health and safety
6

[Page 9]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
o Training
o Periodic review of the implementation of the plan of Part VII – Enforcement, offences and penalties
work for exploitation
o Inspection
o Termination of sponsorship
o Offences & penalties
o Responsibility and liability
Part VIII – Settlement of disputes
Part IV – Protection and preservation of the marine
o Disputes
environment
o Protection and preservation of the marine environment Part IX – Other mineral resource categories
o Environmental management
Part X – Review
o Emergency orders
o Strategic environmental management plan
Annexes to exploitation regulations
o Rights of coastal States
o Environmental bonds and performance guarantees Annex I – Application for approval of a plan of work for
o Restoration and rehabilitation of the marine exploitation to obtain a contract
environment
Annex II – Standard clauses for exploitation contract plus
o Adaptive management approach
schedules
o Seabed sustainability fund
o Environmental liability trust fund
o Human remains and objects and sites of an
archaeological or historical nature
Part V – Confidentiality
o Confidentiality of data and information
o Procedures to ensure confidentiality
Part VI – General Procedures
o Notice and general procedures
o Recommendations for the guidance of contractors
o Duty to co-operate
7

[Page 10]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
Part I Introduction
Use of Terms Definitions applicable to The Exploration Regulations5 contain relatively few terms and This section will evolve as the
and scope the exploitation regime. definitions. It is likely that the Exploitation Regulations will include regulatory framework evolves.
more comprehensive definitions to aid interpretation. These will Definitions should reflect
include those already presented in the Exploration Regulations, save internationally agreed and
as amended to reflect current practice. accepted definitions where
possible.
Part II Applications for approval of plans of work for exploitation in the form of contracts
 Not applicable.
General Defines the entities that  Use wording identical to that contained in the Exploration
may apply for a plan of Regulations.
work for exploitation.
 Guidelines for the
Form of Defines requirement for a  Wording in Exploration Regulations remains relevant, however:-
Preparation of a Plan of
applications plan of work in a form to  Should a “plan of work for exploitation” cover multiple exploitation
Work for Exploitation need
be prescribed in Annex I. areas, within say the area covered under an existing contract for
drafting, including a
exploration?
standard application form.
 Each distinct area of exploitation may have different physical
 Future development /
characteristics and environmental conditions.
licensing of an online
 Options available to the Authority: (1) to request separate plans
application management
of work for exploitation where there are “material” differences
system.
between “exploitation areas” and / or (2) to request separate
 Thought to be given to “new
documents (Feasibility study, Environmental impact statement
ways of doing business” as
(EIS) and Environmental management plan (EMP)) for each
highlighted by the
exploitation area (as ultimately defined).
4 Description corresponds to that contained in the Exploration Regulations, save for any new, proposed regulatory provision.
5 Refers to the Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area (PN Exploration Regulations), ISBA/19/C/17, 22 July 2013.
8

[Page 11]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
Commission in the context
of exploration and its
impact(s) on exploitation
applications.6
 Not applicable.
Certificate of Defines the requirement  Use wording identical to that contained in the Exploration
sponsorship for a certificate of Regulations.
sponsorship.
 Further best practice to be
Financial and A key provision for the  Much of the wording reflected in the Exploration Regulation can
developed from national
technical delivery of due diligence be retained.
regimes and suggestions in
capabilities information about an  However, a greater level of detail will be required to evaluate
the Stakeholder Survey.
applicant. “financial capability” and “technical capability” in connection with
 Guidelines for the
the delivery of a plan of work for exploitation, including
Preparation and Evaluation
the capability to deliver approved development and production
of Information relating to
requirements and the delivery of EMP obligations.
Financial capability and
 Evaluation criteria needed for the Commissions’ assessment
Technical capability to be
procedures.
drafted.
 To consider how this regulation is to be applied uniformly across
all contractor entities.
 Not applicable.
Previous Content of Exploration  Details of existing contract(s) for exploration is important in
contracts with Regulation can be establishing a “preference and a priority” in an applicant’s plan of
the Authority retained. work for exploitation.
 Any assessment process to consider that deliverables and
obligations under a contract(s) for exploration have been
observed.
6 See Summary Report of the Chair of the Legal and Technical Commission on the work of the Commission during the twentieth session of the International
Seabed Authority, ISBA/20/C/20, 16 July 2014 at para 31.
9

[Page 12]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 Council could consider
Undertakings Specific undertakings  Use wording identical to that contained in the Exploration
incorporating additional
contained in Annex III, Regulation. However, this maybe an opportunity to modify or
undertakings particularly in
Article 4(6) of the clarify undertakings fundamental to delivery of plan of work /
Convention.7
contractual obligations?
connection with uneconomic
practices.
 Could be used to include specific and fundamental contract
 A technical working paper
terms, for example in respect of unfair economic practices
requires preparation by an
anticipated by Annex, Section 6(1)(b) of the Agreement8,
expert familiar with the
including disclosure of anti-competitive practices and the
international trade issues
obligation to pay fees and royalties etc.
raised by Annex, Section
6(1)(b) of the Agreement
and specific RRPs drafted.
 Not applicable (at this
Applications for Wording in the  To consider wording in the light of the timing and
stage).
approval of Exploration Regulations operationalization of the Enterprise.
plans of work appears to suffice.
with respect to a
reserved area
 Action plan for
Equity interest Wording in the  Again, to consider wording in the light of the timing and
operationalization of the
in a joint venture Exploration Regulations operationalization of the Enterprise.
Enterprise to be developed.
arrangement appears to suffice.
 See Guidelines for the
Data and This draft regulation  Documents that would typically9 be supplied in support of a plan
Preparation of a Plan of
information to should outline the of work for exploitation could include:
Work for Exploitation above.
be submitted for documents, information
7 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
8 Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982.
9 “Typically” refers to those documents usually supplied under a land-based mining regime. See for example, Model Mine Development Agreement, International
Bar Association (2011).
10

[Page 13]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
approval of the and other data required i. Feasibility study (or report);  See also individual
plan of work for for an application. ii. Environmental impact statement (EIS); document draft regulations
exploitation iii. Environmental management plan (EMP); following.
iv. Social impact assessment / statement and action plan
(this may be integrated into the EIS above);
v. Financing plan;
vi. Closure plan;
vii. Training plan / programme;
viii. [Emergency response and procedures plan: although not
normally a separate document as it would be reflected
elsewhere, given the concept of “emergency orders” this
could be provided as a separate document];
ix. [Health, safety and maritime security plan: again this can
be integrated into the EIS].
 See also “Form of applications” above concerning separate
documents or separate plans of work.
 Guidelines for the
Feasibility study Content and structure to  Content to be adequate to assess commercial viability of
Preparation and Evaluation
be defined for exploitation proposed exploitation activities by exploitation area.
(criteria) of a Feasibility
activities.  To be prepared in accordance with good mining industry practice
study to be drafted.
and based on sound engineering and economic principles and
 Have any “blueprint”
accompanied by a report of an independent expert(s), including
feasibility studies been
mining engineer.
developed for DSM activities
 As part of the application process, alternative development or
that can be adopted by the
production plans may be requested to ensure the optimization
Authority? (To ensure
(including timing) of proceeds of commercial production.
consistency and
comparability in
applications).
11

[Page 14]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 Draft EIS template in
Environmental Content of EIS to be  An EIS must be:
Technical Study No.10 to be
impact further defined / finalised i. Based on the Environmental impact assessment (EIA)
reviewed and updated.
statement (EIS) and be resource-category and on “sound engineering and economic principles” and
specific.10
good mining industry practice and verified by an
 Guidelines for the
Preparation and Evaluation
independent environmental consulting firm.
of an Environmental Impact
ii. Prepared in a language to facilitate review by interested
Statement to be drafted.13
parties plus a non-technical summary.
Should include simple rating
iii. Establish baseline of environmental conditions (a key
criteria. Needs to be
deliverable under the Exploration Regulations).
resource-category specific.
iv. An assessment of project-related significant effects and
 It is recommended that the
impacts, including cumulative impacts.
above be undertaken by an
 A draft EIS template can be found in ISA Technical Study No:
1011 but requires further development and finalisation. expert and a draft template
and guidelines circulated for
 The EIA / EIS should endorse an inter-disciplinary approach.
comment by interested
 The Stakeholder Survey highlighted a number of standards and
parties.
resources for EIA / EIS preparation to be taken account of in
developing a model EIS.12
 The concept of an “Environmental Impact Area” may need to be
developed to cover areas beyond the exploitation area(s),
horizontally and vertically (and cumulative impacts) where
significant impacts may occur.
10 As knowledge is improved, a more structured process of screening and scoping an EIS can evolve.
11 Environmental Management Needs for Exploration and Exploitation of Deep Sea Minerals, ISA Technical Study No. 10 (2012) at 17.
12 For example, Commission for Environmental Assessment Biodiversity in EIA & SEA Background Document to CBD Decision VIII/28: Voluntary Guidelines on
Biodiversity-Inclusive Assessment April 2006; UNEP Environmental Impact Assessment and Strategic Environmental Assessment: Towards an Integrated
Approach 2004; EIS Solwara 1 Project Nautilus Minerals Niugini Ltd.
13 Simple set of criteria for rating EISs could be helpful. See for example, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Impact Assessment Rating System
Criteria.
12

[Page 15]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 An EMP must be / include:  EMP template needs to be
Environmental Structure and content of
i. Based on the EIS and on “sound engineering and drafted.
management EMP to be drafted /
economic principles” and good mining industry practice  Guidelines for the
plan (EMP) defined.
(including IFC Performance Standards 1 and 614 and Preparation and Evaluation
other relevant internationally recognized standards15) and of an Environmental
verified by an independent environmental consulting firm. management plan to be
ii. Prepared in a language to facilitate review by interested drafted.
parties.  Similar to EIS, it is
iii. Methodologies to be employed, sampling and archiving, recommended that the
location of monitoring stations, measurable criteria and above be undertaken by an
threshold indicators. expert and a draft template
iv. Should reflect parameters for and functionality of and guidelines circulated for
Preservation reference zones (PRZs) and Impact comment by interested
reference zones (IRZs). parties.
v. Measures / plans for monitoring, management,  Guidelines for the design
conservation, remediation, restoration / rehabilitation16 and monitoring of
and control including those to avoid, minimise, mitigate, Preservation Reference
rehabilitate and offset, where appropriate, impacts on Zones and Impact
biological diversity within the impacted area and plans to Reference Zones to be
prevent, minimise, mitigate impacts to water column. developed. This may require
 EMP to be supported by an approved environmental an expert working group.
management system (see “Environmental management” below).  Possible multi-stakeholder
 Subject to inspection regime and frequent (say, every 2 years?) workshops post
independent audit. development of EIS and
 Preparation (and delivery) to reflect Best environmental practice EMP templates.
(BEP) and application of the precautionary approach.
 Any conditions attaching to EMP approval to be outcomes based,
measurable, clear, reasonable and enforceable.
 See also Strategic environmental management plan under Part
IV below: a need for co-operation and harmonisation with
contractor EMP process.
13

[Page 16]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 Discussion to be advanced
Social impact Content / action plan to  Can be integrated with EIS.17
on a social action plan for
assessment and be defined for exploitation  Given the remoteness of exploitation activities, no immediate
the Area and a call to
action plan (SIA) activities and socio- communities or individuals potentially significantly affected by
stakeholders to make
economic impacts in the operations.
contributions to this
Area.  Other users of the marine environment to be considered.
discussion.
 Considerations for a social action plan could include contributions
to marine research (e.g. the funding of research within Areas of
Particular Environmental Interest (APEIs)) and incremental
training programmes.
 See also Seabed Sustainability Fund under Part IV below.
 Template Financing plan to
Financing plan Structure and content of  The financing plan will set out the details of how a contractor will
be drafted.
plan to be developed. finance the capital expenditure, working capital needs of the
development and production phases and environmental
management obligations.
 Regulations and / or contract to provide for a consent mechanism
to any charge, mortgage or pledge where such security is
required by a financial institution over the mineral resources /
interest in a contract for exploitation.
 Template Closure plan and
Closure plan Structure and content of  A closure plan raises many issues. It is seen as a dynamic plan
Guidelines for the
plan to be developed. that requires regular review and updating and must anticipate
Preparation and
potential closure of an exploitation area prior to the expiration of
Implementation of a Closure
any plan of work.
plan to be drafted.
 At this point it is difficult to assess the exact contents of a Closure
plan for the Area, but may include:-
14 Endorsed in the Stakeholder Survey.
15 Modified for DSM-specific impacts, as the case may be.
16 See “Restoration and rehabilitation of the marine environment” below.
17 Draft EIS in ISA Technical Study No. 10 reflects “Socio-economic impacts” supra note 8 at page 25.
14

[Page 17]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
o “basic” decommissioning (removal of installations, plant
and machinery);
o Restorative obligations at the time of closure?
o Need for a guarantee or bond?
o Post closure environmental management and monitoring
obligations to be defined. Also to determine the period /
duration of post closure monitoring – appropriate
benchmark (years)?
 There are matters of policy
Size and Guidance criteria for  The Convention requires that RRPs be established in
to be addressed by the
location of determining the size (and accordance with objective criteria for the size of areas being:
Council. Specific guidelines
exploitation location) of exploitation stated production requirements, the state of the art of technology
then need to be drawn up to
area(s) covered area(s). and relevant physical characteristics of the areas…which “shall
identify the criteria to be
by the plan of be neither smaller nor larger than are necessary to satisfy this
applied in assessing the size
work objective”.18
and location of exploitation
 Some stakeholders noted that such RRPs should not simply be a
area(s). It is likely that
determinant of size but also of location and that the Authority
additional expert input is
reserve the right to determine mining block order19 (adaptive
required here and / or initial
management?20).
thoughts of contractors as to
 Albeit, stakeholder comments regarding block order were
their proposed exploitation
directed at environmental considerations, the point is equally
areas and production
valid from the viewpoint of practices such as “high-grading”. What
requirements.
will the Authority’s policy, if any, be here? An average balanced
grade? How will / should this be defined?21
18 Annex III, Article 17(2)(a) of the Convention.
19 This may necessitate the sub-division of exploitation areas into blocks. To be balanced with applicant’s desire for commercial flexibility to manage exploitation
operations.
20 Initial duration of exploitation operations, review periods and the intensity of exploitation operations are also relevant considerations under an adaptive
management approach.
21 See also Section 4 to this Report: Summary of high level issues.
15

[Page 18]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 The US Deep Seabed Hard Minerals Resources Act makes
reference to both size and location and to a “logical mining unit”
which includes economic and environmental considerations as
criteria.22
 Principles (“criteria”) for determining the size and location of the
exploitation area suggested in the framework could include (and
reflecting stakeholder responses): -
o The production requirements of the applicant
(Convention) / the commercial viability of the exploitation
area;
o The state of the art technology to be employed
(Convention);
o The relevant physical characteristics of the area
(Convention);
o The environmental considerations including the location
of the exploitation area(s) and the intensity of the
exploitation operations;
o The proximity of the exploitation area(s) to adjacent
exploration and / or exploitation areas covered under
other third party plans of work / reserved areas;23
o The proximity of exploitation area(s) to marine protected
areas (including APEIs) and vulnerable marine
ecosystems;
o The size and location of PRZs and IRZs (depending on
design criteria – see “Environmental management plan”
above);
22 30 U.S. Code § 1413, License and permit applications, review, and certification.
23 There is a real possibility that exploitation operations in one area may impact adjacent exploration or exploitation areas through smothering by operational and
discharge plumes. This needs to be addressed and buffer zones considered.
16

[Page 19]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
o The proximity of exploitation area(s) to coastal States
(including EEZs and deposits);
o The impact on other users of the proposed exploitation
area(s);
o The proximity to submarine pipelines and cables.
 It will not be possible to set
Fee for Wording can be adapted  The actual costs of processing exploitation applications will be
an application fee at this
applications from the exploration considerably higher than that under exploration applications
stage until the review,
regulations. given the more stringent documentation reviews and inspections.
assessment and
Equally, decisions will need to be made concerning the costs for
administration processes are
independent evaluation processes (e.g. the EA / EMP) and who
fully defined.
these are to be incurred by.
 Additional administration, revision, renewal and consent-type
fees will likely arise under a contract for exploitation.
 Note: the 1994 Agreement requires the payment of an annual fee
from the date of commercial production.24 This will be reflected in
the “Financial terms” Part of the regulations, when drafted.
 Not applicable.
Receipt, Wording can be adapted  No comment.
acknowledgement from the exploration
and safe custody
regulations.
of applications
24 Annex, Section 8(1)(d). The point of commencement of commercial production is broadly defined in Annex III, Article 17(2)(g) of the Convention. There will be a
number of factors that point toward commercial production having been reached. In land-based mining this can be a blurred area and the extent to which it is
possible to define an operating capacity threshold may be preferable.
17

[Page 20]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 A working paper needs to be
Public review of An open, inclusive and  Under the principle of transparency in decision-making on
drafted setting out the public
the cost-effective decision- matters likely to have a significant impact on the environment
participation options and
Environmental making process needs to (including socio-economic impacts), an-inclusive, open review
procedures available,
impact be developed for the process needs to be developed, particularly for the EIS / EMP,
including independent expert
statement and review of specific SIA and Closure plans.
review(s), based on
Environmental documents by interested  Public concerned / potentially impacted are not immediately
stakeholder submissions
management parties. identifiable but mankind as a whole has, arguably, a vested
and best practice regimes.
plan [and Social interest.
The paper can then be
impact  While a public review and engagement process is common
circulated to stakeholders for
assessment and practice in many national jurisdictions, this requires much thought
comment.
Closure plan] for activities in the Area, including the practicalities of any
procedure, timings and costs.
 A number of alternatives have been put forward by stakeholders,
including review mechanisms by independent experts and panels
and the public availability of relevant documents and information
for review.
 Detailed guidelines will be
Consideration The content of this  A re-write of this regulation is likely required to provide for all the
needed in respect of
by the Legal and regulation (which can be necessary eventualities for the Commission’s consideration of a
evaluation criteria to be used
Technical adapted from the plan of work and its subsequent recommendation(s) to Council
by the Commission.
Commission Exploration Regulations) for approval or rejection of an applicant’s plan of work for
 A technical working paper
together with evaluation exploitation.
needs to be drafted to
guidelines is key for  Time limits and milestones in the process will also be critical to
elaborate on the concept of
contractors – element of contractors as well as the evaluation criteria on which the
sound commercial principles
certainty as to process, Commission will ultimately base their recommendations to
(see 1994 Agreement,
timings and evaluation Council. This could include any reasonable conditions25 proposed
25 An indication of “reasonable conditions” and how this will be interpreted should be considered. Plans of work will not be identical. Conditions could include: the
provision of a bond or guarantee; the purchase and maintaining of a specified category of insurance; any specific monitoring and reporting obligations (over and
18

[Page 21]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
criteria. by the Commission to the Council as part of that recommendation Annex, Section 6(1)(a)).27
procedure.  A technical working paper is
 An application for the approval of a plan of work for exploitation required to elaborate on
will require approval of all “documents”26 submitted and must substantial evidence of risk
ensure that the necessary review and public participation of serious harm to the
procedures have been followed and account taken of marine environment in the
submissions received by the Commission from interested parties. case of area(s) disapproved
for exploitation.28
 Should any specific Council
Consideration Wording can be adapted  To consider whether Council should take an additional
procedures and criteria be
and approval of from the Exploration governance step of satisfying itself, particularly where a public
developed here?
plans of work for Regulations. review process is required, that submissions from any review
exploitation by mechanism have been duly taken account of in the decision-
the Council making process and that the application conforms, to best of
knowledge and belief at the time, that say Annex, Section 6 of
the Agreement has been complied with.
 Should this be formalised
Independent Consider setting up  Given the pressures that applications for plans of work for
under the regulatory
technical expert expert working groups or exploitation will place on the existing assessment and decision-
framework?
working group / sub-committees to making structure, additional expert working groups or sub-
sub-committees support the work of the committees may be required.
Commission.
above those under the regulations); the appointment of observers; the duration of consent for an environmental management plan and any conditions relating in
whole or part to an adaptive management approach. Conditions will be recorded in a relevant schedule to a contract for exploitation.
26 Based on the documents (and other information requested) the Commission will need to be satisfied that an applicant has the capability and systems to deliver
health and safety and environmental requirements; that the applicant has adequate technical and financial capability to deliver the plan of work and that project
economics are sound etc.
27 This provision stipulates that as part of the production policy of the Authority, the “development of the resources of the Area shall take place in accordance with
sound commercial principles”. A marine minerals policy and programme document will need drafting when data and information on resources in the Area is more
comprehensive.
28 See Regulation 21(6)(c) PN Exploration Regulations.
19

[Page 22]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
Part III Contracts for exploitation
 Not applicable.
The Contract Wording can be adapted  In addition to the standard clauses, specific conditions may be
from the Exploration approved by the Council based on recommendations by the
Regulations. Commission and reflected in the relevant Schedule to the
Contract.
 Consideration to be given to
Rights of the Wording can be adapted  It would seem appropriate to identify, as exhaustively as
this by the Secretariat.
contractor from the Exploration possible, what rights, including exclusive rights, are being
Regulations. granted here, unless it is felt clear that the definition of
“exploitation” covers this? For example, the definition of
“exploitation” does not include “exploration” but should be a right
to explore in the exploitation area(s).
 Consideration to be given to
Obligations of To provide clarity on any  To the extent that any duties of or obligations on the Authority are
this by the Secretariat.
the Authority obligations of the unclear or not dealt with elsewhere, a provision should be drafted
Authority. to provide clarity, and reflected in the standard contract as
appropriate.
 Consideration of the phrase
Legal title to To provide that legal title  Are there any restrictions that can / should be placed on the
“recovery in accordance with
minerals passes on “recovery” but transfer of title where the contractor is say in breach? For
the Convention”29 requires a
with any restrictions? example, a prohibition on sale / disposal until all fees, royalties,
technical working paper to
profit-share etc. have been paid – or suitable arrangements
be drafted.
made.
 Further understanding of
Duration of This draft regulation  The Convention prescribes limited objective criteria:30
contractor development,
contracts / relates to security of o The economic life of the mining project – depletion of ore,
production and economic
renewal tenure and a key the useful life of mining equipment and processing
models and plans is required
29 Annex III, Article 1 of the Convention.
30 Annex III Article 17(b)(iii) of the Convention.
20

[Page 23]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
contractual term for facilities and commercial viability; here.
contractors. o To permit commercial extraction; and  A balance needs to be
o Reasonable time for construction of commercial-scale established between the
mining and processing systems. commercial requirements of
o But (important wording): “the total duration of contractors and the ability of
exploitation, however, should also be short enough to the Authority to amend
give the Authority an opportunity to amend the terms and terms and conditions in
conditions of the plan of work at the time it considers accordance with revised
renewal in accordance with [RRPs] which it has adopted RRPs.
subsequent to approving the plan of work”.  A working paper needs to be
 Duration will likely be resource category specific. developed for circulation to
 The Stakeholder Survey identified periods of tenure ranging from stakeholders.
an initial 10-year period to a general consensus range of 15-25  Guidelines need to be
years and renewal (extension) periods of 5-10 years (at least in developed for the following:
the case of polymetallic nodules). o Criteria for contract
 Duration is also relevant to the development and revision of a duration – resource
financial payment mechanism. specific.
 It is suggested (from the Stakeholder Survey) that a substantive o Application and
review period occur at approximately 5 years into the contract evaluation criteria
term. The specific conditions attached to that review should be for a substantive
established at the time of the initial application for a plan of work review.
for exploitation. o Application and
 It may be possible to approve stages of exploitation operations. evaluation criteria
In the early phases of this industry, the nature of the deposit may for renewal of an
require a gradual procession to commercial production. If it exploitation contract.
subsequently comes to light that the deposit extent is less than
originally forecast, the duration (or size of area) needs to be
adjusted. Uneconomic production and recovery is to be avoided.
 Commencement of mining: as soon as possible but a logical
21

[Page 24]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
development of production areas within the exploitation area
leading to maximum economic recovery plus development of
infrastructure and transporting and processing construction.
 As to periods of renewal / extension, thought will need to be
given as to whether this should be treated as a “fresh” application
and subject to identical rules of process and procedure as the
original application? Bearing in mind the inclusive and
participative approach being taken.
 A starting point for the regulations could be:
o Specify a maximum initial period;
o Define the parameters of any renewal against specified
criteria (depletion of ore, commercial viability, contractor
not in material default) and documentation needs;
o Provide for a substantive review period at the end of first
5 years based on pre-determined performance and other
criteria and included in the contract – with the ability of
the Authority to adjust terms etc.
o And other review periods at pre-defined timeframes or
triggered on the happening of specific events.
 Guidelines for the evaluation
Performance This draft regulation  Under the Convention31, the Authority is obliged to “establish a
of Production performance
requirements should specify the maximum time interval, after the exploration stage is completed
requirements under a
production obligations and the exploitation stage begins, to achieve commercial
contract for exploitation to
under a plan of work. production”. Allowance here is to be given for construction time
be drafted. To include key
and unavoidable delays.
performance criteria and
 Then following commercial production, “the Authority shall within
indicators.
reasonable limits and taking into consideration all relevant factors
 Council to consider as a
require the operator to maintain commercial production
matter of policy, in
31 Annex III Article 17(2)(c) of the Convention.
22

[Page 25]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
throughout the period of the plan of work”. Need to elaborate on discussion with relevant
taking into consideration all relevant factors. That is, in practice, stakeholders, a cut-off point
what factors will potentially delay, halt or suspend commercial for commercial inactivity.
production? Technical and economic conditions will be one
factor.
 The mining plan and estimated date of commercial production will
be assessed during the evaluation phase (Feasibility study). The
approved Feasibility study locks the contractor in to the
production undertakings in that study.
 A cut-off point needs to be adopted where no commercial activity
has taken place and to afford other operators the opportunity of
developing the resources in that area. The US Deep Seabed
Hard Minerals Act provides a cut-off point of 10 years, unless a
contractor can show just cause.32 Equally, for any periods of
inactivity, should the contractor be required to pay a surface
rent? Arguably, yes but at what rate / level?
 Also provision should be made for a contractor to apply for a
suspension in commercial production due to say economic
conditions (see also Revision clause in the contract).
 Performance requirements expected of the contractor are key
and arguably form fundamental terms of the contract. Flowing
from the Feasibility study, key performance criteria and indicators
should be established. Guidelines will be needed. For example,
the Feasibility study should provide production estimates for the
mining operation; where recovery falls below such agreed
estimates by a pre-determined percentage, the Authority should
be in a position to require the contractor to improve the efficiency
32 See 30 U.S. Code § 1417, Duration of licenses and permits.
23

[Page 26]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
etc. of the mining operation.
 From a commercial perspective, a contractor should be permitted
to make minor changes to an approved programme of activities
without recourse to the Authority. However, any material changes
should require the Authority’s prior approval. The distinction
between minor and material should be discussed and agreed
during the application and approval process and also reflected in
any guidelines.
 It is usual in a land-based mining context that an operator is
required to undertake capacity tests of the mining equipment.
Again, this needs to be considered.
 The following could also be included in this section:
o Production takes place in accordance with sound
commercial principles (see “Consideration by the Legal
and Technical Commission” above);
o No subsidization of activities;
o No discrimination;
o Stipulate Council’s powers to investigate and take
measures.
 A policy in respect of waste
Conservation of General obligation to  To permit the Authority to impose reasonable conditions to
management needs to be
the natural avoid unnecessary waste. prevent waste.
developed.
resources of the  To permit the Council to issue conservation measures to promote
Area33
the conservation of the natural resources for future generations.
 Visibility of processing and treatment of the ore should be
stipulated.
 Not applicable.
Use of sub- To specify the obligations  Contractor’s right to sub-contract but also contractors to extract
on a contractor where
33 Article 145(b) of the Convention.
24

[Page 27]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
contractors sub-contractors are the necessary guarantees for sub-contractor performance.
engaged.  The use of sub-contractors should be addressed in the Feasibility
study – full disclosure.
 Discussions between the
Vessels To specify the obligations  Requirement for vessels engaged in exploitation activities to
Authority and the
operating in the on a contractor in relation remain in Class and be subject to general international legal
International Maritime
Area to vessels undertaking obligations and appropriate conventions.
Organization to be
activities in the Area.  Need to establish clear line of duties and responsibilities and co-
formalised.
operation between the Authority and the International Maritime
Organization (IMO).
 Discussions between the
Protection of To specify the obligations  Procedures to be established to notify submarine cable operator
Authority and relevant
submarine on all parties including organizations of a plan of work application showing co-ordinates
cables and notification procedures.34 of proposed exploitation area(s). representative organizations
formalised.
pipelines  Reporting / notification protocols to be established.
 To determine additional
Health and To specify the additional  To establish what supplementary duties and obligations the
international / DSM-specific
safety measures that Authority has as a regulator in connection with health and safety
standards and the extent of
supplement existing together with applicable standards.
the Authority’s remit / duties
international  Training of employees in health and safety procedures.
agreements.35
 Labour standards also require consideration.
and responsibilities.
 To establish areas of skills
Training Training obligations on a  To be submitted as part of the documentation requirements on
and talent shortages key to
contractor. application for a plan of work.
the development of the DSM
 Thought to be given to the needs of the future industry and
industry.
training programmes targeted accordingly. Training obligations
could also be facilitated under the requirements of a Social
34 Arguably an obligation for sponsoring States to have RRPs in place as well. See Article 113 of the Convention.
35 See Article 146 of the Convention. Relevant international agreements / practices include: International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea and International
Management Code for the Safe Operation of Ships and for Pollution Prevention (IMO).
25

[Page 28]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
impact assessment and contribution, that is, incremental training
programmes including tertiary scholarships etc.
 Note: training obligations of contractor personnel too in matters of
occupational health and safety etc.
 Guidelines on Procedures
Periodic review As per content of  Periodic review at 5-year intervals. Contractor is obliged to
and Information
of the Exploration Regulations. implement / adjust its programme of activities for the next five
Requirements for Review to
implementation year period (adaptive management approach).
be drafted.
of the plan of  Greater clarity and guidance will be needed over the substance
work for and content of these reviews for exploitation programmes.
exploitation  Additionally certain events will require notification and perhaps
the production of incident or exception reports. For example, if
commercial production falls below average targets, casualties or
the achievement of milestones. Specific conditions may be
imposed which require more regular reporting. Reporting is
obviously a key area of governance under the regime but it
needs to be targeted and relevant to the Authority’s role as
regulator.
 To establish clarity on post
Termination of As per Exploration  What obligations remain with the contractor post termination?
termination obligations for a
sponsorship Regulations. Does a contractor remain liable for say EMP monitoring
contractor.
obligations?
 Legal workshop required to
Responsibility As per Exploration  Wording of the Exploration Regulations principally reflects the
explore and develop further
and liability Regulations. Convention.36 The liability of the contractor is for wrongful acts.
principles of responsibility
There is also an overlap in responsibility and liability under the
and liability in the Area.
laws of a sponsoring State. Strict liability may be imposed under
national law.
 The area of liability and redress in the Area particularly as
36 Annex III, Article 22.
26

[Page 29]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
regards environmental damage remains at an embryonic stage of
development.37 Calls for a separate working group to look at this
issue were made in the Stakeholder Survey.
Part IV Protection and preservation of the marine environment
 This area requires the
Protection and General wording in  Acknowledgement of the general principles and obligations within
formation of targeted expert
preservation of Exploration Regulations the exploration regulations should remain. That is, application of
workgroups consisting of a
the marine to be adapted. the precautionary approach, BEP, measures to control pollution.
broad range of stakeholders,
environment Should also specify an adaptive management approach as part
including relevant
of BEP.
international organizations.
 A vast amount of work needs to be performed in this area from
 Specific consideration of
agreeing the thresholds of serious harm to the efficacy of PRZs
“dumping” RRPs.
and IRZs, developing workable environmental targets and
indicators and the application of a precautionary-risk
management framework. Prescriptive regulations and detailed
guidelines will be the ultimate output here; however, it is too early
to draft the same without input from experts, interested
stakeholders, relevant international organizations (e.g. IMO in
respect of marine pollution) and knowledge advancement.
 Dumping: the 1972 London Convention38 and the 1996 Protocol
to the London Convention currently exclude the dumping of
wastes or other matter connected with seabed mining activities
from its scope. More specifically Article 1(4)(3) of the 1996
Protocol states “[t]he disposal or storage of wastes or other
matter directly arising from, or related to the exploration,
37 The Seabed Disputes Chamber of the ITLOS noted “[a]rticle 304…opens the liability regime for deep seabed mining to new developments in international law”,
either under the existing regime or under customary international law. This is further endorsed by the Convention which obliges the ISA Assembly to promote
“international co-operation concerning activities in the Area” and to encourage “the progressive development of international law relating thereto”.
38 Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter.
27

[Page 30]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
exploitation and associated off-shore processing of seabed
mineral resources is not covered by the provisions of this
Protocol”.
 It would thus seem that the disposal or storage of waste or other
matter directly arising from “activities in the Area” will need to be
regulated by the Authority as the competent agency /
international body. What will constitute “dumping” in the Area?
E.g. the deliberate disposal of sediment from on-board
processing and vessels and mining collector in emergency
situations? What protection measures will be needed (possible
co-operation between the Authority and the IMO)?
Regulations should be drafted and the terms for say an EMP
should / could reflect specific waste assessment framework(s),
monitoring and reporting obligations connected with the dumping
of waste (as defined).
 Specific guidelines on
Environmental To operationalize the  The OSPAR Guidelines for Monitoring the Environmental Impact
environmental management
management EMP. of Offshore Oil and Gas Activities (2004-11) provide a sound
systems to be developed.
basis and guide aimed at environmental monitoring (the design
and conduct of monitoring programmes) of discharges from oil
and gas activities. This can be adapted for the specific
requirements of exploitation activities together with other relevant
best practice identified in the Stakeholder Survey and through
future expert / workshop engagement.
 This regulation should oblige the contractor to have an
internationally recognized environmental management system
(EMS) in place e.g. ISO 14001: 1996.
 Specialists should conduct independent audits say every 2 years
for the EMP and EMS.
 Any material revisions to an EMP to require the prior approval of
28

[Page 31]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
the Authority.
 Contractors should, in addition to their reporting obligations to the
Authority, make available a public annual statement of its
environmental targets and its performance delivery against
environmental indicators.
 Secretariat to review
Emergency As per Exploration  This is an area that requires further detailed input as to its
contemporary best practice
orders Regulations. practical operation. While the rationale behind emergency
in the field of marine disaster
measures is sound, its practical application may be limited.
management and
Consequently, a focus on and during the application, reporting,
responding to emergency
inspection and review processes of contractor risk management
situations including the
systems and processes will be of greater significance, including a
lessons learned.
contractor’s Emergency response and procedures plan. While
this regulation is targeted at the protection of the marine
environment, human health and safety is of fundamental
importance.
 Can draw on much existing best practice where relevant,39
including reporting protocols.
 Regional workshops and co-
Strategic The requirement to  This regulation would place an obligation on the Authority to
operation to be developed to
environmental conduct regional SEIAs conduct a Strategic environmental impact assessment(s) of the
formulate regional SEMPs.
management and deliver regional Area and to develop Strategic environmental management
plan (SEMP) SEMPs. plan(s) (SEMPs) including the development of APEI’s.
 The issue of regional SEMPs for the Area drew much discussion
from stakeholders and the need to have SEMPs in place prior to
commercial exploitation.
 The regulation should specify the objectives of the SEMPs.
39 For example, stakeholders suggested: International Convention on oil pollution preparedness, response and cooperation, 1990; IMO Pollution Incident
Response Planning Resolutions MEPC.54(32) & MEPC.85(44); EPA (US) Area Contingency Planning Handbook and EU Directive 2012/18/EU on control of
major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances.
29

[Page 32]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 See also contractor EMP obligations under Part II above: a need
for co-operation and harmonization of SEMP and contractor EMP
deliverables.
 None at this stage.
Rights of coastal The wording from the  Reference to any likely impacts on coastal states should be
States Exploration Regulations addressed in the EIS, where considered significant. See also
remains relevant. “Size and location of exploitation area(s) covered by the plan of
work” above.
 The interaction between
Environmental To provide for a bond or  The necessity for a bond or related performance guarantee
commercial insurance and
bonds and financial guarantee where requires detailed consideration together with the form that any
bond mechanisms needs to
performance requested by the bond / guarantee should take: cash deposit, parent company
be investigated together with
guarantees Authority. guarantee, State guarantee, financial institution letter of credit –
the terms and conditions,
and associated investment grade of any issuer. Cash bonds are
including appropriate
preferable. The terms of its release and what can be deducted
quantum of any bond.
against the deposit must be established.
 For commercial operators there is generally a preference for
commercial insurance rather than bonds.
 Importance of equality of financial treatment and comparable
financial obligations across the contractor base.
 Not all jurisdictions request a bond in practice under mining
regimes but may make provision in their regulations for a bond,
particularly to secure any closure obligations (restoration /
rehabilitation). In the case of activities in the Area these
obligations may be minimal (save for any post closure
monitoring) and a cash bond or guarantee connected with the
performance of the EMP may be more preferable.
30

[Page 33]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 None at this stage.
Restoration and A general restoration  To include a general restoration obligation.40 Restoration to occur
rehabilitation of obligation where where directed to do so by the Council. This would be based on
the marine restoration is feasible the Commissions’ recommendations that would take account of
environment seems appropriate. the likely effectiveness of techniques based on necessity;
technical feasibility; and cost-efficiency on the basis of a cost
benefit analysis, where such quantification can be reasonably
assessed.
 Restoration will also be impacted by “passive rehabilitation”, that
is, the ability for natural recovery to occur.
 “Restoration” & “rehabilitation” will require appropriate legal /
scientific definition in a marine environment context.
 Adaptive management in
Adaptive A regulation that better  All actors to adopt an adaptive management approach to
connection with exploitation
management defines adaptive exploitation activities. Adaptive management may include:-
activities in the Area
approach management.  The permitting of exploitation operations to proceed on a
requires further elaboration
smaller scale or for shorter defined periods of time in order to
with interested parties.
assess impacts on the environment and on human health
and safety;
 The duration of any approval of an EMP;
 The frequency of review periods to be imposed by the
Authority; and
 Additional reporting obligations under an EMP.
 Note: this approach should be balanced with the commercial
(economic) viability of operations (principles of sustainable
development). Development of cost-benefit analysis models
needed.
40 General consensus by stakeholders for focus to be on impact minimisation and mitigation measures rather than restoration at this time.
31

[Page 34]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 A working paper to be
Seabed To establish a seabed  The idea and rationale of a fund is for the Authority to be in a
drafted articulating the
sustainability sustainability fund with position, based on expert recommendations, to direct further
concept and objectives of
fund targeted objectives. research e.g. in relation to marine ecosystems in the Area and to
such a fund for circulation to
develop institutional capacities.41
interested parties.
 At the moment the Authority / Common heritage of mankind are
in a “Catch 22” with no budget for large-scale research activities.
Research remains a principal obligation for contractors.
 The fund could be financed by way of a levy e.g. USD x per wet /
dry ton of ore recovered on board the mining vessel.
 Contributions to the fund could also be considered an element of
social contribution.
 The fund could target the development of technology, which also
presents a revenue stream opportunity for the fund (e.g. patent
royalties).
 Such a funds merit and appeal has yet to be tested but there is a
strong rationale for such a fund.
 None at this stage.
Environmental As recommended by the  The rationale for such a fund stems from a potential
liability trust Seabed Disputes environmental liability gap. The merit of such a fund was
fund Chamber of the ITLOS.42 presented in the Stakeholder Survey.
 Given the suggested Seabed sustainability fund above, the need
for an additional fund requires consideration. However, the
rationale for this fund is different and could be funded by
41 The concept of such a fund originated from the Stakeholder Survey and is based on the Aggregates Levy Sustainability Fund in the United Kingdom. The
rationale for such a fund is also supported by other stakeholder comments including the development of a non-fault based mechanism for research in the deep sea
environment.
42 International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea: Case No. 17: Responsibilities and obligations of States sponsoring persons and entities with respect to activities in
the Area (Request for Advisory Opinion submitted to the Seabed Disputes Chamber).
32

[Page 35]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
allocating a portion of production royalties received by the
Authority.
 None at this stage.
Human remains The wording of the  The SIA and action plan should address any specific matters
and objects and Exploration Regulations relating to the cultural heritage in the exploitation area(s).
sites of an remains relevant.
archaeological
or historical
nature
Part V Confidentiality
 Confidentiality is raised as a
Confidentiality The wording of the  Amendment of the Exploration Regulation’s wording may be
high-level issue under
of data and Exploration Regulations required in the light of any agreed public participation and review
Section 4 to this paper.
information & may be relevant. processes. The principles of the EITI are also relevant here.
Procedures to  There is a call, within the Stakeholder Survey for a presumption
ensure that all data is public (including contracts for exploitation etc.)
confidentiality unless demonstrated otherwise. This would not extend, however,
to confidential information and data.
 Data flow and participation / review processes will drive any
amendment of the confidentiality provisions here. Best practice is
to be sought.
Part VI General procedures
 None.
Notice and The wording of the  None.
general Exploration Regulations
procedures remains relevant.
33

[Page 36]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 The process of issuing
Recommendations The wording of the  This provision may need to be “updated” as to the processes
recommendations by the
for the guidance Exploration Regulations necessary to draft and adopt such recommendations, including
of contractors Commission needs review.
remains relevant. the necessity for expert input and review by interested parties
where applicable.
 None but see Section 4:
Duty to A general duty on all  A general regulation to stipulate the Authority’s obligation to co-
Summary of high level
cooperate parties to co-operate and operate with a sponsoring State (and vice-versa) where required.
issues.
exchange information is Member States should equally be under a duty to co-operate and
necessary. assist the Authority (and vice-versa).
 A duty to co-operate with the Authority is not only essential for
“joint” investigation and enforcement of operational obligations,
but also of sharing information for financial auditing purposes. In
practical terms once an ore vessel has left the Area, what
“control” will the Authority have over auditing for say royalty
payments? Access by a Member State to customs and related
documentation when the vessel arrives in a Member State port or
shipments to the treatment and processing plants will be crucial.
 Aside from “co-operation”, perhaps an exchange of information
provision is applicable here as well defining the types of
information that needs to be shared to allow the Authority and
Member States (and sponsoring States) to discharge their duties
to the common heritage of mankind.
Part VII Enforcement, offences & penalties
 Develop a working paper
Inspection To include inspection  The general wording of the Exploration Regulations (contract)
setting out a suggested
regime in headline should be retained. However, the inspection regime requires
structure and options,
regulations rather than detailed input, an understanding of any potential overlaps with
including funding, for the
standard terms of sponsoring State regimes and its funding and independence.
operation of an inspection
contract.  Use of best technology for remote supervision / “inspection”.
regime, taking account of
34

[Page 37]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
 Need parameters for: comments made in the
o What will be inspected? Stakeholder Survey.
o The qualifications of inspectors? Multi-disciplined or
specific focus?
o The training of inspectors?
o Production of an inspector’s manual.
o Code of Good Practice on integrity, professionalism and
transparency (see Paris MOU / Regional Port State
Control).
 Option here for Member States to nominate their nationals as
inspectors. But for such nationals not to be permitted to inspect
operations involving their nationals or persons under their control
where a Member State is say a sponsoring State.
 In a DSM context, could explore possibilities of cooperation
between the Authority’s Mining Inspectorate and Regional PSC
MOUs to collaborate on gathering and sharing data on
contractors’ compliance with their obligations, including mining
equipment certification and standards (apparently being
developed by classification society ABS and maybe others),
contingency, safety plans and other plans relevant to the Mining
Inspectorate.
 (See also ”Duty to co-operate” above, which will also be of
relevance here).
 Desktop review to be
Offences & Specific, measurable  A specific list of offences to be included in the regulations, as
undertaken on existing /
penalties offences to be defined amended by the Council as appropriate. Parallels can be drawn
comparable regimes.
together with associated from existing regimes.
 Interaction with sponsoring
penalties.  Penalties can either be included in an annex to the regulations,
State offence and penalty
as amendable by the Council.
regime to be understood.
 General characteristics: proportionality; escalation process (i.e.
35

[Page 38]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific elements Commentary / suggested content Actions for
regulation operationalization of draft
description4 regulation
warning process, agreement for remedial action; enforcement
notice; administrative penalty etc.). Penalties ideally against
measurable parameters (targets, thresholds) rather than
breaches of procedural obligations?
Part VIII Disputes
 A technical working paper
Settlement of As per Exploration  Opportunity to consider “lower level” administrative appeals for
needs to be prepared to set
disputes Regulations. the plan of work application process? That is, a simpler appeal
out dispute resolution
mechanism for the Commissions’ recommendations on the
options under the
outcome of a plan of work or its constituent elements.
Convention.
Part XI Resources other than [mineral category]
 None.
Resources other As per Exploration  None.
than [mineral Regulations.
category]
Part X Review
 None.
Review As per Exploration  Given an adaptive management approach, in the early stages of
Regulations. development, the exploitation regulations will benefit from an
annual evaluation.
36

[Page 39]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Annex II Contract for exploitation
A full analysis of the proposed standard clauses for a contract for exploitation is not given below. Many of the standard clauses including
development, production and performance obligations will flow from the headline regulations. However, there are 5 suggested provisions
below that require action and / or consideration.
Clause relating Commentary Action
to:-
“Dealings” or  A contractual clause (or regulation) may be needed to deal with any unfair or uneconomic Expert input required in
arrangements practices (Annex, Section 6 of the Agreement) that occur in the downstream process. This needs connection with the
expert consideration but there could be agreements, transactions or arrangement that may development of RRPs (under
require the prior consent of / notification to the Authority (Council). the Agreement) relating to
 This is a specialist area and requires expert input. That said, transparency, exchange of unfair and / or uneconomic
information and co-operation will facilitate any appropriate obligations on the Contractor (and practices (in accordance with
Member States under the Agreement). the requirements of the
 Financial arrangements downstream may also impact the financial payment system depending on Agreement). See also
its final formulation, including non-arm’s length sales. “Undertakings” above.
Annual Reports  Guidelines will need to be prepared to determine the format and content of a contractor’s annual Guidelines for the
report to the Authority. Subject to specifically agreed confidentiality criteria, these should be made Preparation of Annual
publicly available (or as a minimum, part thereof) under the transparency principle. Reports to be drafted.
 There also needs to be standardization in reporting. A template(s) needs to be devised for this
purpose together with an analysis of actual performance against previously agreed performance
indicators.
 Though this clause speaks to “Annual Reports”, there will be other specific contractor reporting
obligations under the regulations.
37

[Page 40]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Clause relating Commentary Action
to:-
Insurance  Requirement to maintain insurance in accordance with approved plan of work. Annual evidence Discussions with contractors,
required. the insurance industry and
 Requirement to maintain with “financially sound and reputable insurers” – consistent with Good other stakeholders needed
Mining Industry Practice. This is a specialist area, not least when combined with environmental here to gain knowledge and
liability insurance. Specific guidance and advice is required for the Authority to have a full understanding of insurance
understanding of products available, including deductibles, and their efficacy. specifics, including
 More prescriptive description of insurance requirements required. limitations, exceptions and
 See also “Environmental bonds and performance guarantees” above. exclusions.
Suspension and  Wording from Exploration Regulations to be retained. However, clarification needed over serious Technical paper to clarify
termination of persistent and wilful violations;43 and what are considered fundamental terms of the exploitation meaning of serious persistent
contract and
contract? and wilful violations based on
penalties
 Fundamental terms of the contract can be specifically defined in the contract. Serious and existing best practice in
persistent can be clarified in guidance notes reflecting a penalty regime. extractive industries.
Revision  The revision clause in the Exploration Regulations is of greater significance to exploitation Technical paper to clarify
contracts. meaning of inequitable,
 The clause is to be taken from Annex III, Article 19 of the Convention. As an immature industry, it impracticable and impossible
will be difficult to anticipate all eventualities. However, some guidance should be considered in referenced in Annex III,
terms of understanding the concepts of inequitable, impracticable and impossible contained in Article 19, Convention.
Annex III, Article 19.
 Equally, any review periods provided for in the regulations could ease the operation of this
contractual provision.
 Transparency of any agreed changes to the terms of a contract is key; hence a disclosure
provision should be reflected, subject to confidentiality provision.
 Could include suspension of operations for market conditions (note: obligations under an EMP to
continue).
43 Annex III, Article 18 of the Convention.
38

[Page 41]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Section 3: Summary of the response of the Legal and Technical
Commission to Stakeholder Survey submissions
The Commission acknowledges submissions made to the Stakeholder Survey and takes this opportunity to thank all those
who have responded. The submissions received to date are from: 20 Members of the Authority (includes responses from
statutory bodies, governments, ministries and departments); 9 contractors; 13 non-governmental organizations; 4
scientific and research institutions, 6 private entities and 3 individuals.
A synthesis of submissions to the survey has been undertaken by the Secretariat. Submissions not asked to be kept
confidential were placed on the website of the Authority; others remain confidential. The Commission took account of all
submissions in its development of the draft framework for the Exploitation Regulations.
The Commission is however aware that submissions anticipated particularly from many Member States have not been
received so far. It is hoped that this Report will provide an opportunity and encourage those that have not responded to do
so. These responses are requested to be submitted to the Secretariat not later than mid-May 2015 so that they can be
considered in the further development of the framework before the Council meets in July 2015. A wider stakeholder base
will also permit the Commission to better categorise stakeholder groups and interests.
Stakeholders who responded to the 2014 Survey are also invited to provide further comments on this Report no later than
mid-May 2015.
39

[Page 42]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Section 4: Summary of high level issues
The Commission has considered a number of high level issues relating to both the strategic approach to and operational
development of a regulatory framework. This Section 4 summarises these high level issues. Where applicable, actions
flowing from a discussion of the issues will be reflected in the Draft action plan in Section 5 to this document.
It is also likely that these issues will emerge into the regulatory framework in one form or other.
At this stage, comments are invited as to whether (1) any high level issue is considered as missing from the list; (2) that
the commentary appropriately reflects understanding of the issue and (3) how these issues could be incorporated into the
framework.
40

[Page 43]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
1. Information and data – The Authority is currently operating in a data deficient environment, particularly as regards
what we know, what we resource data and environmental data. It is recommended that the Authority establish a fit-for-
don’t know, what we purpose data management strategy as a matter of priority. This is relevant for both the
need to know development of the regulatory framework and on-going informed decision-making.
2. An interim framework The basic draft framework at Section 2 of this document is a starting point to facilitate constructive
dialogue with stakeholders and to aid identification of further areas of study and expert input. As a
consequence of 1. above, the framework will remain very much “work-in-progress” until such time
as knowledge gaps can be filled.
3. One exploitation It is recommended at this stage that the core rules, regulations and procedures (RRPs) are set out
framework? in one over-arching framework. Resource-specific RRPs can be developed at a later stage.
However, an initial focus will be placed on a regulatory framework for polymetallic nodules.
4. Activities in the Area – The specific boundary points for defining activities in the Area and the specific obligations and
clearly defined boundary duties of the various actors, including that of the Authority, is unclear. This includes the potential
points? overlap with the competencies of other relevant international organizations including the
International Maritime Organization. A clear picture of boundary points, including those relevant to
environmental, financial and resource conservation matters needs to be drawn.
5. The transition between Aside from the issue of the extension of contracts for exploration, two further issues are relevant.
exploration and First, the need to develop a process and procedures for prior environmental impact assessment for
exploitation phases specific activities undertaken under a contract for exploration.44 Secondly, for reasons of
commerciality, it is recommended that the concept of a provisional mining licence45, while having
some merit, is forgone and that a substantive review period against pre-determined performance
indicators is undertaken within a 5-year period from the commencement date of a contract for
44 See IBSA/19/LTC/8.
45 See ISA Technical Study: No. 11 at page 4 for background.
41

[Page 44]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
exploitation.
6. Risk assessment, The development of risk assessment and risk management standards and systems (for
evaluation and environmental, occupational health and safety and operational risk) is fundamental to the orderly
management development of activities in the Area. It is recommended that the Authority gains a better
understanding of the risk profile (hazards and classification) of anticipated exploitation operations
through dialogue with contractors and other relevant experts plus ability to draw on existing risk
frameworks in related sectors, including oil and gas.46
7. Time limits and costs The need for certainty and fairness in the regulatory process points toward clearly prescribed time
limits. Time-scales can be benchmarked against best practice mining regimes and be modified to
take account of the decision-making structure of the Authority. Equally, the operation of the
framework must be cost-effective and the sharing of its costs discussed.
8. Confidentiality A tension could exist between the existing confidentiality provisions contained in the Exploration
Regulations47 and the transparency demands of an exploitation framework, particularly public
access to relevant data and information and participation in the environmental decision-making
process.48 There is a growing call in the extractive industries for greater levels of transparency
through information disclosure49 and a presumption that information relating to contracts and
activities under contracts is publicly available50, save for confidential information.51 The issue of
publicly available information and meaningful stakeholder participation in the decision-making
processes is a policy matter for the Authority in discussion with interested stakeholders.
46 Other assessment frameworks recommended by stakeholders includes: Assessment Framework for Scientific Research Involving Ocean Fertilization LC 32/15,
annex 6 (IMO parties); Specific Guidelines for the Assessment of Carbon Dioxide for Disposal into Sub-seabed Geological Formation LC32/15 annex 8.
47 See Regulations 36 and 37 PN Exploration Regulations.
48 See The UNECE Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters, Aarhus, 25
June 1998. See also IFC Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability, January 2012.
49 For example, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
50 Model Mine Development Agreement, MMDA 1.0, International Bar Association.
51 Relating to “commercial”, “economic”, “property” and “business secrets” etc.
42

[Page 45]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
9. Effective protection for The importance of a number of environmental protection and mitigation tools under the Convention
the marine environment and the procedural obligations to deliver the same is vital. It is recognised that the Authority and
from harmful effects other actors should adopt an ecosystem-based approach to environmental management in the
Area. Additionally, it is recognised that specific criteria and guidance must be developed for
concepts such as “significant adverse change” and “vulnerable marine ecosystems”; to this end the
Authority can draw upon existing best practice definitions52 and work already in progress across
the stakeholder base. Equally, the development of a precautionary risk management framework is
fundamental to the delivery of protection goals.
10. “Internationally Standard(s) development as part of good mining industry practice53 is a pre-requisite to the orderly
recognized standards” development of the industry and a key consideration for the regulatory framework across a broad-
and their significance in range of subject matter. The content and credibility of industry standards should be delivered
exploitation activities through consensus-building and a multi-stakeholder approach. Many international standards54,
including those developed in the oil and gas sector, will be directly applicable to exploitation
activities. Indeed many standards have been suggested by stakeholders.55 Others will require
modification and development. Standard(s) development should, primarily, be an industry-driven
initiative.56
52 For example, under the UN FAO International Guidelines for the Management of Deep-Sea Fisheries in the High Seas and the Convention on Biological
Diversity’s criteria for Ecologically or Biologically Significant Marine Areas (EBSAs).
53 See Annex III, Article 17(1)(b)(xii) of the Convention relating to the adoption and application of mining standards and practices.
54 Also need to consider regional or country standards which may be equivalent to, based on or have a higher level of standard. E.g. EU Regulation (EC) No
761/2001 Eco-management and audit scheme (EU).
55 For example: Code for Environmental Management of Marine Mining (IMMS); ISO 14001; ISO 9001/9002; ANZI Z10 or OHAS 18001 (health and safety
management system-related).
56 Ultimately standards will need to be backed-up by the necessary regulatory checks and balances: reporting, notification, inspection and independent audit
obligations and procedures. That is, a general question of how standards will be enforced.
43

[Page 46]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
11. Sponsoring State(s) and It is not believed that the division of duties and responsibilities is clearly defined between a
the Authority – a clear sponsoring State and the Authority. This relates to matters including enforcement and monitoring /
division of duties and inspection, offence and penalty systems, liability and responsibility of a contractor etc. From a
responsibilities? contractor’s perspective there is the potential for a duplicative regulatory burden. This needs to be
clarified and duties and responsibilities more clearly defined. Equally, this also points to effective
co-operation between the Authority and a sponsoring State.
12. “High-grading” of mineral The issue of “high-grading” was addressed in the Stakeholder Survey and drew a number of
deposits diverging stakeholder opinions including: that a grading policy should be a matter for commercial
determination; that low-grade mining could become economical over time as technology develops
and that high-grading potentially minimizes the environmental footprint (“untouched” lower grade
areas). Other stakeholders made reference to the exploitation of an “average balanced grade”. The
issue of grading policy needs further consideration with interested parties, including “typical” break-
even cut-off grades (economic and technical feasibility) and environmental policy considerations.
13. Other: existing best Other aspects of relevance include the need to draw on existing best practice and not to “reinvent
practice, learnings, co- the wheel” and to identify any defects and learnings from the current exploration application and
operation and implementation process, including new ways of doing business identified by the Commission.
information-sharing Additionally, the general need for co-operation and information sharing will be fundamental to the
effective operation of the regulatory framework.
44

[Page 47]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Section 5: Draft action plan
This draft action plan is derived from Section 2 of this report “Draft framework for the Exploitation Regulations” which, when
further developed by July, will be reported to Council for its consideration.
The plan at this stage attempts to identify in a simple way the areas of priority as follows (the dates indicated are those of
the anticipated upcoming meetings of the Commission):
 Priority A: Initiate by July 2015;
 Priority B: Initiate by February 2016;
 Priority C: No action anticipated at this time.
45

[Page 48]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Use of terms and scope  This section will evolve as the regulatory framework evolves. Definitions should reflect internationally C
agreed and accepted definitions where possible. Involvement of marine jurists and linguists.
Form of applications  Guidelines for the Preparation of a Plan of Work for Exploitation need drafting, including a standard A
application form.
C
 Development / licensing of an online application management system.
 Thought to be given to “new ways of doing business” as highlighted by the Commission in the context of A
exploration and its impact(s) on exploitation applications.
Financial and technical capabilities  Guidelines for the Preparation and Evaluation of information relating to Financial capability and Technical A
capability to be drafted. These can reflect best practice from national regimes and detailed responses in
the Stakeholder Survey.
Undertakings  A working paper requires preparation by an expert familiar with the international trade issues raised by C
Annex, Section 6(1)(b) of the Agreement and specific RRPs drafted.
Equity interest in a joint venture  Action plan for operationalization of the Enterprise to be developed.57 C
arrangement
Feasibility study  Guidelines for the Preparation and Evaluation (criteria) of a Feasibility study to be drafted. A
 Have any “blueprint” feasibility studies been developed for exploitation activities which can be adopted by
the Authority? (To ensure consistency and comparability in applications).
Environmental impact statement  Draft EIS template in Technical Study No.10 to be reviewed and updated. A
 Guidelines for the Preparation and Evaluation of an Environmental Impact Statement to be drafted. Should
include simple rating criteria. Needs to be resource-category specific.
 [It is recommended that the above be undertaken by an expert and a draft template and guidelines
57 The ISA Secretariat is preparing a discussion paper on this matter for presentation to the Commission at its July 2015 meeting.
46

[Page 49]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
circulated for comment by interested parties].
Environmental management plan  EMP template needs to be drafted. B
 Guidelines for the Preparation and Evaluation of an Environmental management plan to be drafted.
 Similar to EIS, it is recommended that the above be undertaken by an expert and a draft template and
guidelines circulated for comment by interested parties.
 Guidelines for the design and monitoring of Preservation Reference Zones and Impact Reference Zones to
be developed. This may require an expert working group.
 Possible multi-stakeholder workshop(s) post development of EIS and EMP templates.
Social impact assessment and action plan  Discussion to be advanced on a social action plan for the Area and a call to stakeholders to make B
contributions to this discussion.
Financing plan  Template Financing plan to be drafted. C
Closure plan  Template closure plan and Guidelines for the Preparation and Implementation of a Closure plan (including B
post-decommissioning surveys and monitoring) to be drafted.
Size of exploitation area covered by the plan  There are matters of policy to be addressed by the Council. Specific guidelines then need to be drawn up B
of work to identify the criteria to be applied in assessing the size and location of exploitation area(s). It is likely that
additional expert input is required here and / or initial thoughts of contractors as to their proposed
exploitation areas and production requirements.
Public review of the environmental impact  A working paper needs to be drafted setting out the public participation options and procedures available, A
statement and environmental management including independent expert review(s), based on stakeholder submissions and best practice regimes. The
plan [and social impact assessment and paper can then be circulated to stakeholders for comment.
closure plan]
Consideration by the Legal and Technical  Detailed guidelines will be needed in respect of evaluation criteria to be used by the Commission. B
Commission  A technical working paper needs to be drafted to elaborate on the concept of sound commercial principles
B
(see 1994 Agreement, Annex, Section 6(1)(a)).
 A technical working paper is required to elaborate on substantial evidence of risk of serious harm to the B
marine environment in the case of area(s) disapproved for exploitation.
47

[Page 50]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Consideration and approval of plans of work  Should any specific Council procedures and criteria be developed here? B
for exploitation by the Council
Rights of the contractor  Consideration to be given to this by the Secretariat (clarity on rights being granted). B
Obligations of the Authority  Consideration to be given to this by the Secretariat (clarity on Authority’s obligations). B
Legal title to minerals  Consideration of the phrase “recovery in accordance with the Convention” requires a technical working B
paper to be drafted.
Duration of contracts  Further understanding of contractor development and production models and plans is required here. A
 A balance needs to be established between the commercial requirements of contractors and the ability of
the Authority to amend terms and conditions in accordance with revised RRPs.
 A working paper needs to be developed for circulation to stakeholders.
 Guidelines need to be developed for the following:
o Criteria for contract duration – resource specific.
o Application and evaluation criteria for a substantive review.
o Application and evaluation criteria for renewal of an exploitation contract.
Performance requirements  Guidelines for the evaluation of Production performance requirements under a contract for exploitation to C
be drafted. To include key performance criteria and indicators.
 Council to consider as a matter of policy, in discussion with relevant stakeholders, a cut-off point for
commercial inactivity.
Conservation of the natural resources of the  A policy in respect of waste management needs to be developed. C
Area
Vessels operating in the Area  Discussions between the Authority and the International Maritime Organization to be formalized. A
Protection of submarine cables and pipelines  Discussions between the Authority and relevant representative organizations formalized. A
48

[Page 51]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Health and safety  To determine additional international / DSM-specific standards / development of best practice Emergency B
Response Plan and Procedures.
 Guidelines on the placing of floating installations and related safety zones in the Area to be developed in
conjunction with IMO.
Training  To establish areas of skills and talent shortages key to the development of the DSM industry. C
Periodic review of the implementation of the  Guidelines on Procedures and Information Requirements for Review to be drafted. C
plan of work for exploitation
Termination of sponsorship  To clarify post termination obligations for a contractor. C
Responsibility and liability  Legal workshop required to explore and develop further principles of responsibility and liability in the Area. C
Protection and preservation of the marine  This area requires the formation of targeted expert workgroups consisting of a broad range of B
environment stakeholders, including relevant international organizations. Specific areas to be identified including RRPs
for “dumping”.
Environmental management  Specific guidelines on environmental management systems to be developed together with reporting C
requirements.
Emergency orders  Secretariat to review contemporary best practice in the field of marine disaster management and A
responding to emergency situations including the lessons learnt.
Strategic environmental management plan  Regional workshops and co-operation to be developed to formulate regional SEMPs. B
Environmental bonds and performance  The interaction between commercial insurance and bond mechanisms needs to be investigated together A
guarantees with the terms and conditions, including appropriate quantum of any bond.
Adaptive management approach  Adaptive management in connection with exploitation activities in the Area requires further elaboration with C
interested parties.
49

[Page 52]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Seabed sustainability fund  A working paper to be drafted articulating the concept and objectives of such a fund for circulation to B
interested parties.
Confidentiality of data and information &  Confidentiality is raised as a high-level issue under Section 4 to this paper. C
Procedures to ensure confidentiality
Recommendations for the guidance of  The process of issuing recommendations by the Commission needs review. C
contractors
Inspection  Develop a working paper setting out a suggested structure and options, including funding, for the operation C
of an inspection regime.
Offences & penalties  Desktop review to be undertaken on existing / comparable regimes. B
 Interaction with sponsoring State offence and penalty regime to be understood.
Settlement of disputes  A technical working paper needs to be prepared to set out dispute resolution options under the C
Convention.
Annex II Contract for exploitation Actions for operationalization
“Dealings” or arrangements  Expert input required in connection with the development of RRPs (under the Agreement) relating to unfair C
and / or uneconomic practices (in accordance with the requirements of the Agreement). See also
“Undertakings” above.
Annual Reports  Guidelines for the Preparation of Annual Reports to be drafted. C
Insurance  Discussions with contractors, the insurance industry and other stakeholders needed here to gain A
knowledge and understanding of insurance specifics, including limitations, exceptions and exclusions. See
also “Environmental bonds and performance guarantees” above.
50

[Page 53]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Annex II Contract for exploitation Actions for operationalization
Suspension and termination of contract and  Technical paper to clarify meaning of serious persistent and wilful violations based on existing best practice C
penalties in extractive industries.
Revision  Technical paper to clarify meaning of inequitable, impracticable and impossible referenced in Annex III, C
Article 19 Convention.
High level issues Actions for operationalization Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Information and data – what we know, what  It is recommended that the Authority establish a fit-for-purpose data management strategy as a matter of A
we don’t know, what we need to know priority.
Risk assessment, evaluation and  It is recommended that the Authority gains a better understanding of the risk profile of proposed exploitation A
management operations through dialogue with contractors (identification of hazards and potential incident categories).
Effective protection for the marine  Specific criteria and guidance must be developed for concepts such as “significant adverse change” and B / C
environment from harmful effects “vulnerable marine ecosystems”.
 Development of a precautionary risk management framework (see Risk assessment, evaluation and
management above).
“Internationally recognized standards” and  Standard(s) development should, primarily, be an industry-driven initiative. Authority to engage with relevant B
their significance in exploitation activities stakeholders to initiate a standard development process and framework.
Sponsoring State(s) and the Authority – a  Authority to initiate dialogue with sponsoring States to discuss way forward. B
clear division of duties and responsibilities?  Develop a matrix setting out the division of duties and responsibilities.
“High-grading” of mineral deposits  The issue of grading policy needs further consideration with interested parties, including “typical” break- B
even cut-off grades and environmental policy considerations.
51

[Page 54]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Section 6: Making a submission
Structure of submission
Please would you kindly structure your submission as follows:
 An opening paragraph introducing you and / or your organization and your direct and / or indirect interest in activities in
the Area (Please note for those stakeholders who responded to the Authority’s initial Stakeholder Survey, this is not required).
 Your comments and / or suggestions referenced to the relevant part of this Report.
 Any other general and / or specific comments you wish to make on the development of the regulatory framework.
 A list of any supporting documents accompanying your submission, together with website links where applicable.
 Your express consent (see below) to make your personal details and submission publicly available (note: the Authority
may also reference your comments against specific Sections and parts of the framework for ease of reading by all
stakeholders).
 Your interest in future contact by the Authority and / or being part of a stakeholder group (except for those stakeholders
who have already expressed such an interest).
 Your contact details clearly identified.
Closing date
The closing date for submissions is Friday, 15th May 2015 at 1800hr (EST).
Submission details
Submissions should be sent by post or electronically as follows:
Report to Stakeholders (ISBA/Cons/2015/1)
International Seabed Authority
14-20 Port Royal Street
Kingston
Jamaica
52

[Page 55]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Email: consultation@isa.org.jm (format: PDF or Microsoft Word document).
Online submission publication & confidentiality
In the interests of transparency and to promote and encourage further discussion, the Authority may publish all
submissions on a dedicated area of its website athttp://www.isa.org.jm/en/home.
However, the Authority requires your express consent and approval to make submissions publicly available (i) including
your name and organization as appropriate or (ii) to make your comments without disclosing any of your personal details.
Please include such express consent in your submission where applicable. The default position is that your comments and
personal details will be kept confidential without attribution.
Future engagement & privacy
The Authority will retain your personal contact details securely and in-confidence (except for any disclosure consented to
above) with a view to contacting you solely in respect of future surveys, consultations and engagement.
Should you no longer wish the Authority to store your personal details, please advise us by sending a request to remove
your contact details to the email address above.
Anonymous submissions
Please note any submissions made anonymously will be disregarded for the purposes of this Report.
53

[Page 56]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
54