[Page 1]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in the Area
!

[Page 2]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!

[Page 3]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
Contents Page!
Purpose of this Report 4
Progress to date 4
!
Environmental and Seabed Mining Directorate 6
Regulations
!
Next steps 6
Making a submission 8
Annex I: Working draft of Exploitation 10
Regulations and Standard Contract Terms
!
!
!
!
!
Published July 2016 by:
International Seabed Authority
14-20 Port Royal Street
Kingston Jamaica
3

[Page 4]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
Purpose of this Report
1. The purpose of this Report of the Legal and Technical Commission (the
Commission) is to introduce a first working draft of the Regulations and Standard
Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in the Area for consideration by
the Members of the Authority and all stakeholders.
2. At this stage the Commission is seeking the views and opinions on the content
and structure of the draft at Annex 1 from the Authority’s stakeholder base. It is
proposed that any fine-tuning of the drafting language will take place at a later date by a
legal draftsperson and translated into the Authority’s official languages.
Progress to date
3. At its July 2015 meeting the Commission reflected on a revised draft framework
and action plan to guide and direct the delivery of draft Exploitation regulations. The
revised draft took account of stakeholder responses and input following the issue of the
Report to Members of the Authority and all stakeholders in March 2015. The revised
draft framework and action plan, as amended by the Commission, together with a
discussion over the high-level issues was issued on 15 July 2015 to the Council and
made publicly available.1 The Commission also proposed a list of seven priority
deliverables which the Council duly endorsed at its 21st Session. This included the
preparation of a “zero draft” of the Exploitation Regulations.2 Owing to its excessive
workload, the Commission was not in a position to complete its work on a working draft
in February 2016 as intended and it was not therefore possible at that time to issue a
working draft for comment by the Authority’s stakeholder base.
4. Since March 2016, the Secretariat has issued 4 discussion papers which are
directly relevant to the current and future development of the regulatory code. These
technical discussions papers!relate to dispute resolution; confidentiality; communication
and engagement by the Authority and enforcement and liability issues in the Area.3
Additionally, the development of a full regulatory code will be subject to any
recommendations adopted by the Authority flowing from the current Article 154 Review.
5. At its July 2016 meeting the Commission reviewed a revised working draft which
is now made available to stakeholders at Annex I to this Report.
6. The draft at Annex I is seen as Phase 1 in the development of the full regulatory
code for the regulation of exploitation activities in the Area. It is issued on the basis that
it is work in progress and does not represent the final views of the Commission on any
matter or issue under consideration.
7. The draft addresses the following issues, in particular:
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1 Available at https://www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Survey/Report-2015.pdf.
2 Identified as Priority deliverable No. 1 in ISBA/21/C/16, Annex III.
3 See https://www.isa.org.jm/legal-instruments/ongoing-development-regulations-exploitation-mineral-
resources-area.
4

[Page 5]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
(a) the orderly, safe and rational management of the resources, including the
efficient conduct of activities in the Area and, in accordance with sound principles of
conservation, the avoidance of unnecessary waste;
(b) to develop an effective regulatory regime to organize and control activities
in the Area;
(c) to allocate rights to exploit resources in the Area efficiently to further the
objectives of the Convention and the granting of contracts for exploitation only to
applicants suitably qualified to undertake exploitation activities in the Area;
(d) providing for security of tenure in respect of the exploitation rights
allocated;
(e) to uphold the carrying out of activities in the Area in accordance with good
industry practice;
(f) to provide for necessary measures for the discharge of the Authority’s
responsibilities and duties under the Convention;
(g) to facilitate the adoption and development of risk assessment and risk
management and other standards and systems to measure, monitor and mitigate,
environmental, occupational health and safety and operational risk and performance;
(h) the delivery of the financial objectives of the Convention and a fair
financial return to mankind for its resources;
(i) to promote accountable, transparent and fair decision-making in respect
of the regulation and management of activities in the Area;
(j) to promote a robust, stable, predictable and cost-effective regulatory
mechanism;
k) to develop the resources of the Area with reasonable regard to the rights
and legitimate interests of other users of the marine environment;
(l) to the prevention, reduction and control of pollution and other hazards to
the marine environment, including the coastline, and of interference with the ecological
balance of the marine environment, particular attention being paid to the need for
protection from harmful effects of activities in the Area in accordance with best
environmental practice and the precautionary approach (to be developed under the
environmental regulations);
(m) to promote the safety of life and property at sea;
(n) to encourage and promote the continued development of technology
necessary to recover the resources of the deep seabed.
8. The Commission considers the draft as providing for the basic elements of the
application process and subsequent administration of contractor activities, rights and
obligations including a first blush of the financial terms applicable to exploitation
contracts.4 Detailed plans of work will need to be crafted so that clear performance
objectives can be articulated and ultimately measureable, monitored and enforced under
an exploitation contract. The regulatory code will also be supported going forward by a
number of guidelines and recommendations by the Commission.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
4 See also Conference Report on the Deep Seabed Mining Payment Regime Workshop San Diego, 17-18
May 2016. Available at https://www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Pubs/2016/DSM-ConfRep.pdf.
5

[Page 6]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
Environmental and Seabed Mining Directorate Regulations
9. As to other elements of the full regulatory code, current thinking is a need for two
further and separate sets of regulations, namely “Environmental Regulations” and
“Seabed Mining Directorate Regulations”.
10. The Environmental Regulations would cover matters such as the development of
strategic environmental management plans: regional management plans; the
environmental impact assessment process; environmental management and monitoring
obligations, including emergency orders; the environmental approval process and
environmental obligations. A timeline with deliverable products wold be a priority task for
the upcoming Commission. The environmental regulations and related guidelines would
also seek to operationalize the concept serious harm, practical application of the
precautionary approach and others required in this theme. The workshop held in Surfer's
Paradise sponsored by the Government of Australia5 addressed some of these issues.
The approach of separate Environmental regulations will facilitate their formulation.
11. A separate “Seabed Mining Directorate Regulations” could direct the
development of the day-to-day functioning (administrative, reporting, enforcement) and
operating procedures of the Authority as regulator, including that of an inspectorate.
They could also, if necessary, clarify the powers and functions bestowed on the various
organs of the Authority by the Convention. Their content may also reflect any
recommendations that flow from and are adopted by the Authority following the Article
154 review, not least the way the Authority may change the way it conducts business in
view of it operating as a mining regulator.6
Next steps
12. The Commission acknowledges that once all draft regulations have been
prepared, there will be a need to review their content for any overlap and ambiguity,
particularly as regards clarity in duties and obligations. Furthermore, in connection with
this “building block” approach to regulatory development, it should be understood that
“nothing is agreed until everything is agreed”.
13. As part of its submission to the Council at its 22nd Session, the Commission will,
in its Chair’s Report provide a summary of progress, particularly in respect of the priority
deliverables and will identify next steps in the development of the Mining Code.
14. Responses to this Report from Members of the Authority and all stakeholders are
invited by early November 2016 so that the Secretariat can prepare an update for the
first session of the new Commission in February 2017.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
5 See Co-Chair’s Report of the Griffith Law School and the International Seabed Authority Workshop on
Environmental Assessment and Management for Exploitation of Minerals in the Area Surfer’s Paradise, 23-
26 May 2016. Available at https://www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Pubs/2016/GLS-ISA-Rep.pdf.
6 See also High-level issue No. 14 which relates to the development of a mining directorate / inspectorate
and environmental regulator and the recommended benchmarking of land-based / oil and gas regulators.
6

[Page 7]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
15. It is proposed that the next Commission will formulate a clear methodology with
regard to the elaboration of the Mining Code, timelines and an effective and efficient
stakeholder participation strategy in connection with regulatory development being
undertaken by Council.
16. As highlighted above, the Commission is seeking views and comments to the
draft from the Authority’s stakeholder base. In particular, the Commission would
appreciate specific observations on the following:
(a) Whether the structure and content is sufficiently adequate and clear for the
intended purpose and objectives of the regulations?
(b) Whether stakeholders consider that separate regulations in respect of the
environmental matters and a mining directorate are appropriate?
(c) Given the depth and breadth of the task in developing a regulatory code,
what recommendations do stakeholders have for the Authority to ensure its
development in a transparent and inclusive manner while at the same time
recognizing a need for efficiency?
(d) Any comments related to the ISA Discussion Papers referred to at paragraph
4 above.
7

[Page 8]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
Making a submission
Structure of submission
Please would you kindly structure your submission as follows:
• An opening paragraph introducing you and / or your organization and your direct and
/ or indirect interest in activities in the Area (Please note for those stakeholders who
previously responded to the Authority’s Stakeholder Survey and other consultation
documents, this is not required).
• Your comments and / or suggestions referenced to the relevant part of the working
draft.
• Any other general and / or specific comments you wish to make on the development
of the regulatory framework.
• A list of any supporting documents accompanying your submission, together with
website links where applicable.
• Your express consent (see below) to make your personal details and submission
publicly available (note: the Authority may also reference your comments against
specific parts of the draft for ease of reading by all stakeholders).
• Your contact details clearly identified.
Closing date
The closing date for submissions is Friday, 2nd November 2016 at 1800hr (EST).
Submission details
Submissions should be sent by post or electronically as follows:
Working draft – Exploitation regulations (ISBA/Cons/2016/1)
International Seabed Authority
14-20 Port Royal Street
Kingston
Jamaica
Email: consultation@isa.org.jm (format: PDF or Microsoft Word document).
Online submission publication & confidentiality
In the interests of transparency and to promote and encourage further discussion, the
Authority may publish all submissions on a dedicated area of its website
athttp://www.isa.org.jm/en/home.
However, the Authority requires your express consent and approval to make
submissions publicly available (i) including your name and organization as appropriate or
(ii) to make your comments without disclosing any of your personal details. Please
include such express consent in your submission where applicable. The default position
is that your comments and personal details will be kept confidential without attribution.
8

[Page 9]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
Future engagement & privacy
The Authority will retain your personal contact details securely and in-confidence (except
for any disclosure consented to above) with a view to contacting you solely in respect of
future surveys, consultations and engagement.
Should you no longer wish the Authority to store your personal details, please advise us
by sending a request to remove your contact details to the email address above.
Anonymous submissions
Please note any submissions made anonymously will be disregarded for the purposes of
this Report.
9

[Page 10]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
Annex I
Working draft of Exploitation Regulations and Standard Contract
Terms
Working structure for the Exploitation regulations
Title
Preamble
Part I – Introduction
1. Use of terms and scope
Part II – Applications for approval of plans of work for Exploitation in the form of
contracts
Section 1: Form of Applications
2. Qualified applicants
3. Certificate of sponsorship
4. Form of Applications and Information to accompany a Plan of Work for Exploitation
Section 2: Fee for applications
5. Fee for applications
Section 3: Processing of applications
6. Receipt, acknowledgement and safe custody of applications
Section 4: Consideration of applications by the Commission
7. General
8. Assessment of Applicants
9. Amendments to a proposed Plan of Work for Exploitation
10. Performance guarantee
11. Commission’s recommendation for the approval of a Plan of Work
Section 5: Consideration of an Application by the Council
12. Consideration and approval of a Plans of Work for Exploitation by the Council
Part III – Exploitation Contracts
The Contract
13. The Contract
14. Term of Exploitation Contracts
15. Termination of sponsorship
16. Use of Exploitation Contract as security
17. Transfer of rights and obligations
Part IV – Review and modification of a Plan of Work for Exploitation
10

[Page 11]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
18. Modification of a Plan of Work for Exploitation by a Contractor
19. Review of activities under a Plan of Work for Exploitation
Part V – Financial terms of a Contract
Section 1 General
20. Equality of treatment
Section 2 Annual fees
21. Annual contract administration fee
22. Annual fixed fee
Section 3 Liability to a Royalty
23. Contractor shall pay Royalties
24. Rate of Royalty and Royalty base
25. Opinion on liability to Royalty
Section 4 Returns, payments and refunds
26. Reporting Period
27. Royalty Returns
28. Information to be submitted
29. Payment of Royalty
30. Overpayment of Royalty
Section 5 Records, inspection and audit
31. Proper books and records to be kept
32. Audit and inspection by the Authority
33. Appointment of auditor
34. Assessment by the Authority
35. Confidential information
Section 6 Anti-avoidance measures
36. General anti-avoidance rule
37. Arms-length transactions
Section 7 Interest and penalties
38. Interest on unpaid Royalty
39. Penalty in respect of any under declaration or underpayment
40. Penalty in respect of any failure to deliver or furnish a Royalty Return
41. Penalty in respect of false Royalty Returns and information
42. Recovery from performance guarantee
Section 8 Suspension or termination of Contract in respect of unpaid Royalty
43. Suspension or termination of Contract in respect of unpaid Royalty
Section 9 Disputes regarding Royalty calculations and payments
44. Disputes regarding Royalty calculations and payments
Section 10 Review of payment mechanism
45. Review of payment mechanism
11

[Page 12]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral Resources in
the Area
!
Part VI – Information gathering and handling
46. Confidentiality of Information
47. Procedures to ensure confidentiality
48. Information to be submitted on expiration of the Contract
Part VII – General Provisions
49. Notice and general procedures
50. Recommendations for the guidance of Contractors
51. Duty to cooperate and exchange of information
52. Right’s of coastal States
53. Other applicable fees
Part VIII – Inspection
54. Inspectorate
Part IX – Enforcement and penalties
55. Compliance notice
56. Power to take remedial action
Part X – Settlement of disputes
57. Administrative review mechanism
58. Settlement of disputes
Part XI – Review of the Authority’s Regulations
59. Review of the Authority’s Regulations
Annexures to Exploitation Regulations
Annex I Application for approval of a Plan of Work to obtain an Exploitation
Contract
Section I Information concerning the Applicant
Section II Financial information
Section III Undertakings
Section IV Previous contracts with the Authority
Section V Attachments
Annex II Feasibility Study
Annex III Mining Plan
Annex IV Financing Plan
Annex V Emergency Response and Contingency Plan
Annex VI Exploitation Contract and Schedules
Annex VII Standard Clauses for Exploitation Contract
Annex VIII Schedule of Contract violations and monetary penalties
Annex IX Schedule of other applicable fees
12

[Page 13]
!
Preamble
In accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 (“the Convention”), the seabed and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction, as well as its resources, are the common heritage of mankind,7
the Exploration and Exploitation of which shall be carried out for the benefit of mankind as a
whole, on whose behalf the International Seabed Authority acts. The objective of this set of
Regulations is to provide for the exploitation of the Resourses of the Area.
Part I
Introduction
Draft Regulation 1
Use of terms and scope
1. Terms used in the Convention shall have the same meaning in these Regulations.
2. In accordance with the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (“the Agreement”), the
provisions of the Agreement and Part XI of the Convention shall be interpreted and
applied together as a single instrument. These Regulations and references in these
Regulations to the Convention are to be interpreted and applied accordingly.
3. For the purposes of these Regulations:
[“Definitions”: a list of defined terms can be found at Schedule 1 to this working draft.
The content and wording of the terms defined is considered indicative at this stage of
drafting. Definitions will evolve as both regulatory content evolves and / or a common
approach toward terms based on internationally accepted definitions is established].
4. These Regulations shall not in any way affect the freedom of scientific research, pursuant
to article 87 of the Convention, or the right to conduct marine scientific research in the
Area pursuant to articles 143 and 256 of the Convention. Nothing in these Regulations
shall be construed in such a way as to restrict the exercise by States of the freedom of
the high seas as reflected in article 87 of the Convention.
5. These Regulations may be supplemented by further rules, regulations and procedures, in
particular on the protection and preservation of the Marine Environment.
6. These Regulations are subject to the provisions of the Convention and the Agreement
and other rules of international law not incompatible with the Convention.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
7 Consideration should be given to the use / adoption of “Common heritage of humankind” in the
context of the Area to reflect the evolution in language adopted since 1982.
13

[Page 14]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part II
Applications for approval of Plans of Work for Exploitation in the form
of Contracts
Section 1
Form of Applications
Draft Regulation 2
Qualified applicants
1. Subject to the provisions of the Convention, the following may apply to the Authority for
approval of Plans of Work:
(a) The Enterprise,8 on its own behalf or in a joint arrangement;
(b) States parties, State enterprises or natural or juridical persons which possess the
nationality of States or are effectively controlled by them or their nationals, when
sponsored by such States, or any group of the foregoing which meets the
requirements of these Regulations.
2. Each application shall be submitted by:
(a) In the case of a State, by the authority designated for that purpose by it;
(b) In the case of an entity, by a designated representative or the authority
designated for that purpose by the sponsoring State or States; and
(c) In the case of the Enterprise, by its competent authority.
3. Each application by a State enterprise or one of the entities referred to in paragraph 1(b)
shall also contain:
(a) Sufficient information to determine the nationality of the Applicant or the identity
of the State or States by which, or by whose nationals, the Applicant is effectively
controlled; and
(b) The principal place of business or domicile and, if applicable, place of registration
of the Applicant.
4. Each application submitted by a partnership or consortium of entities shall contain the
information required by these Regulations in respect of each member of the partnership
or consortium.
Draft Regulation 3
Certificate of sponsorship
1. Each application by a State enterprise or one of the entities referred to in regulation
2(1)(b) shall be accompanied by a certificate of sponsorship issued by the State of which
it is a national or by whose nationals it is effectively controlled. If the Applicant has more
than one nationality, as in the case of a partnership or consortium of entities from more
than one State, each State involved shall issue a certificate of sponsorship.
2. Where an Applicant has the nationality of one State but is effectively controlled by
another State or its nationals, each State shall issue a certificate of sponsorship.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
8 The exact nature, role and operationalization of the Enterprise in connection with exploitation activities
remains for consideration and reflection in a future draft of these regulations.
14

[Page 15]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
3. Each certificate of sponsorship shall be duly signed on behalf of the State by which it is
submitted, and shall contain:
(a) The name of the Applicant;
(b) The name of the sponsoring State;
(c) A statement that the Applicant is:
i. A national of the sponsoring State; or
ii. Subject to the effective control of the sponsoring State or its nationals;
(d) A statement by the sponsoring State that it sponsors the Applicant;
(e) The date of deposit by the sponsoring State of its instrument of ratification of, or
accession or succession to, the Convention;
(f) A declaration that the sponsoring State assumes responsibility in accordance
with articles 139 and 153 (4) of the Convention and article 4(4) of Annex III to the
Convention.
4. States or entities in a joint arrangement with the Enterprise shall also comply with this
regulation.
Draft Regulation 4
Form of Applications and Information to accompany a Plan of Work for Exploitation
1. Each application for approval of a Plan of Work shall be in the form prescribed in Annex I
to these Regulations, shall be addressed to the Secretary-General, and shall conform to
the requirements of these Regulations.
2. Each applicant, including the Enterprise, shall, as part of its application, provide a written
undertaking to the Authority that it will:
(a) Accept as enforceable and comply with the applicable obligations created by the
provisions of the Convention and the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Authority, the decisions of the organs of the Authority and the terms of its
Contracts with the Authority;
(b) Accept control by the Authority of activities in the Area, as authorized by the
Convention;
(c) Provide the Authority with a written assurance that its obligations under the
Contract will be fulfilled in good faith; and
(d) Comply with the national laws, regulations and administrative measures of the
sponsoring State made pursuant to Articles 139, 153(4) and Article 4(4) of Annex
III of the Convention.
3. Each applicant shall also provide a written undertaking that it will (i) not engage in any
unfair economic practices9 and (ii) a written statement that it has not accepted nor will
accept any subsidies other than those permitted under the agreements referred to in
Section 6(1)(b) of the Annex to the Agreement and that it will, at the earliest available
opportunity, make known to the [Council / Secretary-General] any practice that has
contravened or is likely to be in contravention of Section 6(1)(b) of the Annex to the
Agreement.
4. An application shall also be accompanied by the following documents:10
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
9 Will require a definition based on a Section 6 context.
10 As contemplated by the draft legal framework issued in July 2015, a number of guidelines will need
drafting to guide the preparation and / or evaluation of the respective documents to be submitted.
15

[Page 16]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(a) A Feasibility Study prepared in accordance with Annex II to these Regulations;
(b) An Environmental and Social Impact Statement prepared in accordance with the
Environmental Regulations;11
(c) A Mining Plan prepared and based on the Feasibility Study and in accordance
with Annex III to these Regulations;
(d) A Financing Plan prepared and based on the Feasibility Study and in accordance
with Annex IV to these Regulations;
(e) An Emergency Response and Contingency Plan prepared in accordance with
Annex V to these Regulations and the Environmental Regulations;
(f) A Training Plan;
(g) An Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan prepared in accordance
with the Environmental Regulations; and
(h) A Closure Plan prepared in accordance with the Environmental Regulations.
5. The Commission may permit the delivery and submission of the Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan at a date later to that of the original
application.
6. Where an application proposes multiple non-contiguous Mining Areas, the Commission
may require separate documents under paragraphs 4(b), (g) and (h) above for each
Mining Area.12
Section 2
Fee for applications
Draft Regulation 5
Fee for applications
1. Each Applicant shall pay a fee for processing an application for approval of a Plan of
Work.13
2. The fee will be a [fixed amount] expressed in United States dollars or its equivalent in a
freely convertible currency, to be paid in full at the time of the submission of the
Application.
3. The amount of the application fee will be determined by a decision of the Council, and
reviewed on a regular basis by the Council in order to ensure that it covers the
administrative costs incurred by the Authority in processing an application.
4. If the administrative costs incurred by the Authority in processing an application are less
than the fixed amount, the Authority shall refund the difference to the Applicant. If the
administrative costs incurred by the Authority in processing an application are more than
the fixed amount, the Applicant shall pay the difference to the Authority, provided that any
additional amount to be paid by Applicant shall not exceed 10 per cent of the fixed fee
referred to in paragraph 2.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
11 The EIS will also reflect matters relating to human health, safety and maritime security.
12 The delivery of a single plan of work (and thus a single exploitation contract) and the option for
separate documents where mining areas are not contiguous is preferable from an administrative
perspective. However, this will require further consideration including the criteria under which separate
documents would be requested.
13 The fee structure for the processing of a plan of work for exploitation will be more complicated than
that under the exploration application process given a need for a public participation process and
potential for expert review(s) of documents provided.
16

[Page 17]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
5. Taking into account any criteria established for this purpose by the Finance Committee,
the Secretary-General shall determine the amount of such differences as indicated in
paragraph 2, and notify the Applicant of its amount. The notification shall include a
statement of the expenditure incurred by the Authority.
6. The amount due must be paid by the Applicant or reimbursed by the Authority within 3
months of the signing of the Contract referred to in regulation 13.
7. The Authority is not obliged to carry out any action in respect of an application until the
prescribed fee(s) has been paid.
Section 3
Processing of applications
Draft Regulation 6
Receipt, acknowledgement and safe custody of applications
The Secretary-General shall:
(a) Acknowledge in writing within 30 Days receipt of every application for approval of
a Plan of Work submitted under this Part, specifying the date of receipt;
(b) Place the application together with the attachments and annexes thereto in safe
custody and ensure the confidentiality of all confidential data and information
contained in the application; and
(c) Notify the members of the Authority of receipt of such application and circulate to
them information of a general nature which is not confidential regarding the
Application; and
(d) Notify the members of the Commission of receipt of such application. The
Commission shall consider such application at its next meeting provided that the
notification and information under paragraph (c) has been circulated at least 30
Days prior to the commencement of that meeting of the Commission.
Section 4
Consideration of applications by the Commission
Draft Regulation 7
General
1. The Commission shall examine applications in the order in which they are received.
2. The Commission shall consider applications expeditiously and shall submit its report and
recommendations to the Council at the first possible opportunity, taking into account the
schedule of meetings of the Authority.
3. The Commission may, prior to issuing any recommendations to the Council under these
Regulations to approve or not approve a Plan of Work, request additional information,
including advice from an Appropriately Qualified Expert, on any aspect of the Plan of
Work.
4. In discharging its duties, the Commission shall apply the Rules of the Authority in a
uniform and non-discriminatory manner.
17

[Page 18]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Draft Regulation 8
Assessment of Applicants
1. The Commission shall determine if the Applicant:
(a) Is a qualified applicant;
(b) Has given the undertakings and assurances specified in regulation 4(2) and (3);
(c) Has satisfactorily discharged its obligations in relation to any previous contract
with the Authority; and
(d) Has the financial and technical capability to carry out the Plan of Work and to
meet all obligations under any exploitation contract.
2. In considering the financial capability of an Applicant the Commission must be satisfied
that the Applicant will be capable of committing or raising sufficient financial resources to
cover the estimated costs of the proposed Exploitation Activities and all other associated
costs of complying with the terms and conditions of any exploitation contract, including
the payment of any applicable fees or other financial payments and charges in relation to
the Exploitation Activities, the estimated costs of implementing the Closure Plan and
continued monitoring and management of the Marine Environment.
3. In considering the technical capability of an Applicant the Commission must be satisfied
that the Applicant:
(a) Has the necessary technical and operational capability to carry out the proposed
Plan of Work in accordance with Good Industry Practice using appropriately
qualified and where applicable, adequately supervised personnel;
(b) Has adopted internationally recognized quality control and management
standards;
(c) Has the necessary Risk Assessment and Risk Management systems in place to
effectively implement the proposed Plan of Work in accordance with Good
Industry Practice and these Regulations, including systems to meet health,
safety and environmental requirements for the activities proposed in the Plan of
Work; and
(d) Has protection and indemnity insurance cover, including environmental liability
cover, as required in accordance with these Regulations.
4. The Commission shall determine if the proposed Plan of Work:
(a) Optimizes the recovery and extraction of the Minerals;
(b) Reflects the economic life of the Exploitation project, taking into account all
relevant factors including the depletion of the ore, the useful life of Exploitation
equipment and processing facilities, commercial viability and a reasonable time
period for preparation including the construction of mining vessels, Installations,
Exploitation-related equipment and of any vessels, equipment or facilities to be
used for the handling, processing or transportation of the Minerals recovered
from the Mining Area;
(c) Provides for effective protection of the Marine Environment through the
application of best environmental practices and a precautionary approach
[including, but not restricted to, the impact on biodiversity, the protection and
conservation of the Natural Resources of the Area, the protection of vulnerable
marine ecosystems and cumulative effects of the Exploitation Activities through
an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and Environmental
Management Systems and Closure Plan];
18

[Page 19]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(d) Provides for the effective protection of human health and safety;
(e) Provides for Exploitation Activities to be carried out with reasonable regard for
other activities in the Marine Environment, including navigation, laying of
submarine cables and pipelines, fishing and scientific research; and
(f) Includes an Emergency Response and Contingency Plan in accordance with
Good Industry Practice.
5. The Commission shall consider the extent to which the proposed Plan of Work is
consistent with:
(a) The policies set out in Article 150 of the Convention;
(b) The production policy of the Authority prepared in accordance with section 6 of
the Agreement; and
(c) Any other relevant policies established by the Assembly.
6. The Commission shall determine whether appropriate public review and consultation has
been undertaken, in accordance with the Environmental Regulations, and must take into
account relevant submissions received as a result.
7. If the Commission finds that the Application does not comply with these Regulations, it
shall notify the Applicant in writing, through the Secretary-General, indicating its reasons.
The Applicant may, within 45 Days of such notification, modify and re-submit its
Application.
Draft Regulation 9
Amendments to a proposed Plan of Work for Exploitation
1. At any stage prior to making its recommendation to the Council, the Commission may
request the Applicant to amend or modify its Application or may propose specific
amendments for consideration by the Applicant where such amendments are considered
reasonably necessary to bring the Plan of Work into conformity with the applicable
standards adopted by the Authority.
2. The Applicant must respond within 60 Days following receipt of such proposal from the
Commission, agreeing to the proposal, rejecting the proposal, or making an alternative
proposal for the Commission’s consideration.
3. The Commission shall, in accordance with its guidelines, agree key performance criteria,
measures, indicators and thresholds with an Applicant against which to measure the
production and environmental performance of any approved Plan of Work, including
those relevant for the purposes of the reviews contemplated by regulation 19. Such
agreed criteria, measures, indicators and thresholds shall be incorporated in the Plan of
Work.
Draft Regulation 10
Performance guarantee
1. The Commission may recommend to the Council that as part of the terms and conditions
for the approval of a Plan of Work, that the Applicant deposit a Financial Guarantee or
Security in respect of the performance of its obligations, undertakings or conditions in a
Plan of Work or Contract and at a time to be agreed with the Applicant but no later than
the commencement date of Exploitation Activities.
19

[Page 20]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
2. The Commission shall make recommendations to the Council as to the form and the
amount or value of the performance guarantee following consultation with the Applicant.14
3. Any Financial Guarantee or Security required under this regulation, and approved by the
Council as part of a Plan of Work may be in addition to any Financial Guarantee or
Security required as part of any terms and conditions attaching to the approval of the
Environmental Plans under the Environmental Regulations.
4. Where any Financial Guarantee or Security is deposited as part of the terms and
conditions for a Plan of Work, the Authority shall hold such Financial Guarantee or
Security in accordance with its policies and procedures, which shall provide for:
(a) The repayment or release of any Financial Guarantee or Security upon
compliance by the Contractor of its obligations that are the subject of the
Financial Guarantee or Security; or
(b) The forfeiture of any Financial Guarantee or Security where the Contractor fails
to comply with such obligations.
5. Any requirement for any Financial Guarantee or Security under this regulation shall be
applied in a uniform and non-discriminatory manner.
Draft Regulation 11
Commission’s recommendation for the approval of a Plan of Work
1. If the Commission is satisfied that the Applicant meets the criteria listed in regulation 8(1)
and that the proposed Plan of Work, including any amendments or modifications thereto,
meets the criteria listed in regulation 8(4), it shall recommend approval of the Plan of
Work to the Council.
2. The Commission shall not recommend approval of a proposed Plan of Work if part or all
of the area covered by the proposed Plan of Work is included in:
(a) A plan of work for Exploration approved by the Council for the same resource
category;
(b) A plan of work approved by the Council for exploration for or exploitation of other
resources if the proposed Plan of Work would be likely to cause undue
interference with activities under such approved plan of work for other resources;
(c) An area disapproved for Exploitation by the Council, in cases where substantial
evidence indicates the risk of serious harm to the Marine Environment;
(d) An area otherwise designated by the Council as an area in respect of which no
Exploitation Activities shall occur; and
(e) A Reserved Area or an area designated by the Council to be a Reserved Area,
except in the case of eligible applications under these Regulations.
3. The Commission shall not recommend the approval of a Plan of Work if it determines
that:
(a) Such approval would permit a State party or entities sponsored by it to
monopolize the conduct of activities in the Area with regard to the resource
category covered by the Plan of Work;
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14 Guidelines will be required to determine the criteria for any performance guarantee including
parameters as to the quantum of the guarantee, the form of the guarantee and conditions under which a
guarantee will be held, used and returned. Terms and conditions of any guarantee will be scheduled to
a contract.
20

[Page 21]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(b) Another qualified entity has a preference and a priority over the area covered by
the Plan of Work in respect of the same resource category.
4. If the Commission is not satisfied that the Applicant meets the criteria listed in regulation
8(1) and that the proposed Plan of Work, including any amendments or modifications
thereto, meets the criteria listed in regulation 8(4), it and accordingly is of the view that it
should not recommend approval of the Plan of Work, it shall so inform the Applicant and
provide the Applicant with a further opportunity to make representations within 60 Days.
The Commission shall consider any such representations made by the Applicant at its
next available meeting in preparing its report and recommendations to the Council.15
Section 5
Consideration of an Application by the Council
Draft Regulation 12
Consideration and approval of plans of work for Exploitation by the Council
The Council shall consider the reports and recommendations of the Commission relating to
approval of Plans of Work in accordance with paragraphs 11 and 12 of section 3 of the
Annex to the Agreement.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
15 This begs the question as to the point at which a dispute may arise between the Authority and an
applicant / prospective contractor and the appropriate forum for its settlement. Where a dispute is of a
technical nature, determination by an Appropriately Qualified Expert or a panel of experts may be
desireable. See ISA discussion paper Dispute Resolution Considerations Arising Under the Proposed
New Exploitation Regulations, February 2016
(https://www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Pubs/DPs/DP1.pdf).
21

[Page 22]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part III
Exploitation Contracts
Draft Regulation 13
The Contract
1. After a Plan of Work has been approved by the Council, it shall be prepared by the
Secretariat in the form of an Exploitation Contract between the Authority and the
Applicant as prescribed in Annex VI to these Regulations. Each Exploitation Contract
shall incorporate the Standard Clauses set out in Annex VII to these Regulations.
2. The Exploitation Contract shall be signed by the Secretary-General on behalf of the
Authority and by the Applicant. The Secretary-General shall notify all members of the
Authority in writing of the conclusion of each contract.
3. The Exploitation Contract and its Schedules is a public document and will be made
available for publication on the Authority’s website, save for any Confidential Information
as defined under regulation 46 which shall be edited or redacted prior to any public
disclosure.
Draft Regulation 14
Term of Exploitation Contracts
1. An Exploitation Contract shall be granted for an initial period not exceeding [2016] years
or such shorter period as applicable to the expected economic life of the Exploitation
Activities of the resource category set out in the Mining Plan. So long as:
(a) The resource category is recoverable annually in commercial quantities from the
Contract Area;
(b) The Contractor has complied in all material respects with the Rules of the
Authority;
(c) The Contractor is not in material default of the Exploitation Contract; and
(d) The Exploitation Contract has not been sooner terminated in accordance with its
terms,
then, a Contractor shall have the option to renew the Exploitation Contract for periods of
not more than 10 years each and upon such terms and conditions that the Authority and
the Contractor shall agree to reflect then-existing and foreseeable conditions. The
Exploitation Contract shall remain in effect during the period in which the Authority and
the Contractor are negotiating the terms of any such renewal.
2. An application to renew an Exploitation Contract shall be made in writing to the
Secretary-General by a Contractor no later than one year before the expiration of the
initial period or renewal period, as the case may be, of the Exploitation Contract:
(a) Be made in accordance with any guidelines prescribed by the Authority;
(b) State the duration of the renewal sought (up to 10 years);
(c) State the reasons and period for which renewal is required in accordance with
this regulation;
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16 This is considered indicative at this stage until a better understanding of business models and
operations is achieved.
22

[Page 23]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(d) Be accompanied by a report of an Appropriately Qualified Expert verifying the
extent of compliance with and suggested modifications to the Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan in accordance with the Environmental
Regulations;
(e) Include an updated Mining Plan and / or Plan of Work and such other information
as reasonably required by the Authority; and
(f) Be accompanied by the applicable fee for processing an Exploitation Contract
renewal under regulation 53.
3. Unless otherwise indicated by the sponsoring State or States at the time of making the
application for renewal, sponsorship shall be deemed to continue throughout the
extension period and the sponsoring State or States shall continue to assume
responsibility in accordance with articles 139 and 153 (4) of the Convention and article 4
(4) of Annex III to the Convention.
4. Any renewal of an Exploitation Contract shall be effected by the execution by the
Secretary-General and the duly authorized representative of the Contractor of an
agreement in the form set out in Annex [X] to these Regulations. The terms and
conditions applicable to the Exploitation Contract during the period of renewal shall be
the terms and conditions in force as at the date of the extension, as amended under this
regulation.
Draft Regulation 15
Termination of sponsorship
1. Each Contractor shall have the required sponsorship throughout the period of the
Exploitation Contract.
2. If a State terminates its sponsorship it shall promptly notify the Secretary-General in
writing. The sponsoring State should also inform the Secretary-General of the reasons for
terminating its sponsorship. Termination of sponsorship shall take effect 6 months after
the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General, unless the notification
specifies a later date.
3. In the event of termination of sponsorship the Contractor shall, within the period referred
to in paragraph 2, obtain another sponsor. Such sponsor shall submit a certificate of
sponsorship in accordance with regulation 3. Failure to obtain a sponsor within the
required period shall result in the termination of the Exploitation Contract.
4. A sponsoring State shall not be discharged by reason of the termination of its
sponsorship from any obligations accrued while it was a sponsoring State, nor shall such
termination affect any legal rights and obligations created during such sponsorship.
5. The Secretary-General shall notify the members of the Authority of the termination or
change of sponsorship.
23

[Page 24]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Draft Regulation 16
Use of Exploitation Contract17 as security
1. The Contractor may, with the prior written consent of the Authority, which is not to be
unreasonably withheld or delayed, mortgage, pledge, lien, charge or otherwise encumber
all or part of its interest under [an approved Plan of Work or] an Exploitation Contract for
the purpose of raising financing to effect its obligations under an Exploitation Contract.
2. As a condition to receiving consent under this regulation, the Authority shall request
evidence that the mortgagee shall agree upon foreclosure to undertake Exploitation
Activities in accordance with the requirements of the Exploitation Contract and these
Regulations, and transfer the mortgaged property only to a transferee that commits to,
and has the financial and technical capability in accordance with regulation 8(2) and (3)
to conduct Exploitation Activities in accordance with the requirements of Exploitation
Contract and these Regulations including the requirement of a certificate of sponsorship
in accordance with regulation 3.
3. In seeking consent under this regulation, a Contractor shall disclose to the Authority (as
part of the Financing Plan, if known at the time the Financing Plan is submitted), the
terms and conditions of any such encumbrance in paragraph 1 above and its potential
impact on the Exploitation Activities under the Exploitation Contract in the event of any
default by the Contractor.
4. The Authority may, in accordance with Good Industry Practice and where applicable, set
a maximum ratio of a Contractor’s debt to equity.
5. The Authority shall not be obliged to provide any funds or issue any guarantees or
otherwise become liable directly or indirectly in the financing of the Contractors’
obligations under a Exploitation Contract. The Contractor shall be responsible for raising
all of the financing necessary to implement the Plan of Work.
6. The Authority may enter into any agreements and provide formal documents as any
lenders reasonably require and shall record any such encumbrance, including its terms
and conditions, in the Seabed Mining Register.
Draft Regulation 17
Transfer of rights and obligations
1. The rights and obligations of a Contractor under an Exploitation Contract may be
transferred in whole or in part only with the consent of the Authority in accordance with
these Regulations.
2. The Authority shall require the transferee to provide an unconditional undertaking to
assume all obligations assigned by the Contractor.
3. An application for consent to transfer shall be made to the Secretary-General.
4. The Commission shall consider the application for consent to transfer at its next available
meeting and shall consider whether:
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17 This regulation requires further consideration and discussion and a policy decision as to its suitability
(and relevance) given the complexities that may arise. An understanding of how, where relevant and
applicable, the potential terms and conditions of any encumbrance could impact Exploitation Activities is
needed and the relationship between this regulation 16 and regulation 17 relating to a transfer of rights
and obligations (specifically provided for by Article 20, Annex III of the Convention).
24

[Page 25]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(a) The transferee has the financial capability and technical capability to carry out
Exploitation Activities under the Exploitation Contract;
(b) The transferee undertakes and is likely to comply with the terms and conditions
of, and give proper effect to, the Exploitation Contract;
(c) The transferee is a fit and proper person to take over the Exploitation Contract
and to engage in Exploitation in the Area;
(d) [That in all material respects, the assessment criteria under regulation 8 remain
fulfilled;]
(e) That the transferee has or will have prior to the date of transfer a certificate of
sponsorship in accordance with regulation 3; and
(f) That the transfer does not permit the transferee to monopolize the conduct of
activities in the Area with regard to the resource category covered by the Plan of
Work.
5. [Where the Exploitation Contract is subject to a mortgage or charge registered in the
Seabed Mining Registry, the Commission shall not recommend a consent to the transfer
unless it has seen evidence of consent to the transfer from that mortgagor or charge-
holder].
6. Where the Commission is satisfied in accordance with paragraph 4, it shall recommend
approval of the application for consent to the Council.
7. Nothing in this regulation restricts the right of the Council to require a transferee to
assume or to provide a Financial Guarantee or Security to secure its compliance under
an Exploitation Contract.
8. The Council shall not unreasonably withhold consent to the transfer if it is satisfied that
the proposed transferee is in all respects a qualified Applicant in accordance with the
Regulations and assumes all of the obligations of the Contractor.
9. The Contractor or transferee shall provide the Authority with any such information as the
Authority, in its reasonable discretion, requests in respect of an application for consent
under this regulation.
10. A transfer is validly effected only upon:
(a) Payment of the prescribed transfer fee pursuant to regulation; and
(b) Record by the Authority of the transfer in the Seabed Mining Registry.
11. Where an application for consent to transfer is not approved by the Council, no
assignment or transfer of the rights and obligations under the Exploitation Contract shall
be effective.
12. Upon effective transfer under this regulation, the terms, undertakings and conditions of
an Exploitation Contract shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon a party’s
transferees.
25

[Page 26]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part IV
Review and modification of a Plan of Work for Exploitation
Draft Regulation 18
Modification of a Plan of Work for Exploitation by a Contractor
1. A Contractor shall not be permitted to modify the Plan of Work annexed to an Exploitation
Contract save for, and upon written notification to the Authority18, any minor or
administrative changes to activities as may be necessary and prudent in accordance with
Good Industry Practice.
2. Any proposed modification to the Plan of Work not being a minor or administrative
change under paragraph (1) above shall be deemed a material change, and shall require
the prior written approval of the Authority before such material change is implemented in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Environmental Regulations and these
Regulations.
3. For the purpose of this regulation, the Commission shall establish guidelines for the
determination of the nature and the scale or extent of a material change to a Plan of
Work and in respect of which any application procedures need to be followed, including
any relevant matters under the Environmental Regulations.
Draft Regulation 19
Review of activities under a Plan of Work for Exploitation
1. An Exploitation Contract shall provide for a review of activities under a Plan of Work.
Such a review shall be undertaken by the Secretary-General and the Contractor and
shall discuss any proposed modification(s) to the Plan of Work as may be necessary or
desirable in the light of any changes in circumstances that may have occurred or
experience and knowledge gained by the Contractor or the Authority in the period since
the commencement of the Exploitation Contract or prior review, as the case may be.
2. A review of activities under paragraph 1 shall be at intervals of not greater than five
years, save that specific plans comprising a Plan of Work may require more frequent
review periods in the light of experience and knowledge gained. Review intervals shall be
agreed between an Applicant and the Commission and recorded in Schedule 11 to the
Exploitation Contract.
3. A review of activities shall be undertaken in accordance with the guidelines on
procedures and information for a review and any specific terms of a review agreed at the
time of the Application.
4. The Secretary-General shall report on each review to the Council. Where any review
results in a material change to a Plan of Work, the Secretary-General shall ensure that
such material change is approved by the Authority in accordance with regulation 18.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
18 As a general observation, a number of regulations make a generic reference to “the Authority”. In due
course, the specific organ or functional unit (e.g. a technical division within the mining directorate /
secretariat) will need to be assigned appropriate and clear responsibility under say the Seabed Mining
Directorate regulations with, where applicable, a relevant delegated authority from the Council /
Assembly.
26

[Page 27]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
5. Nothing in this regulation shall preclude the Secretary-General or the Contractor from
making a request to initiate discussions regarding any matter connected with the
Exploitation Activities at more frequent intervals than agreed under paragraph (1).
27

[Page 28]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part V
Financial terms of an Exploitation Contract
Note: This Part V reflects a first draft of regulatory provisions to provide for
administration / fixed fees and royalty liability together with administration and
management related matters. Further work will be undertaken in connection with
the formulation and precise mechanics of a payment mechanism, including a
royalty calculation (base, rate etc.). Equally, this Part V will also reflect, in due
course, other potential fees and payment obligations e.g. environmental fees,
trust fund contributions etc. as these concepts and the payment mechanism itself
are developed further, including environmental policy, objectives and approaches
and the relevant economic and financial tools to deliver these. Additionally,
consideration will also be given toward reflecting financial payment obligations
as standard contract terms in place of / in addition to their inclusion in this Part V.
Section 1
General
Draft regulation 20
Equality of treatment
The Authority shall apply the provisions of this Part V in a uniform and non-discriminatory
manner and shall ensure equality of financial treatment and comparable financial obligations
for contractors.
Section 2
Annual fees
Draft regulation 21
Annual contract administration fee
1. A Contractor shall pay to the Authority from the date of signature of an Exploitation
Contract and at the time of submission of the annual report, an Annual Contract
Administration fee as determined by the Council from time to reflect the costs actually
and reasonably incurred by the Authority in the administration and supervision of an
Exploitation Contract.
2. The amount of the Annual Contract Administration Fee will be determined by a decision
of the Council, and reviewed on a regular basis by the Council.
Draft regulation 22
Annual fixed fee
1. A Contractor shall pay to the Authority an Annual Fixed Fee from the date of
commencement of Commercial Production.
2. The Annual Fixed Fee shall be computed by multiplying the total size of the [Contract
Area] in square kilometers identified in an Exploitation Contract by an annual rate per
28

[Page 29]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
square kilometer denominated in United States dollars.19 The Council shall establish
such annual rate for each Calendar Year.20
3. The Annual Fixed Fee shall become due and payable to the Authority within 30 Days of
the commencement of each Calendar Year at the rate prescribed by the Council under
paragraph (2) above, save that a pro-rated Annual Fixed Fee shall, where the date of
commencement of Commercial Production occurs during a Calendar Year, become due
and payable to the Authority within 30 Days of such date of commencement.
4. The Annual Fixed Fee may be credited against any royalty payable under regulation 23
for the relevant Calendar Year. In any Calendar Year, a Contractor shall be liable for an
amount being the greater of the Annual Fixed Fee, or such pro-rated amount, or the
Royalty payable.
Section 3
Liability to Royalty
Draft regulation 23
Contractor shall pay Royalty
1. A Contractor shall calculate and pay to the Authority a Royalty in respect of all Minerals
recovered under an Exploitation Contract and sold or removed without sale from the
Mining Area from the date of commencement of Commercial Production and in
accordance with this Part V.
2. Nothing in paragraph (1) above shall affect the liability of a Contractor to provide a
Royalty Return and to make payment of any Royalty liability in respect of any Minerals
sold or removed without sale from the Mining Area following the expiration of an
Exploitation Contract.
Draft regulation 24
Rate of Royalty and Royalty base
1. A Contractor shall calculate a Royalty for each Reporting Period in accordance with
paragraph 2.
2. The Royalty shall be calculated as follows: [subject to further elaboration at future
payment regime workshop(s)].
Draft regulation 25
Opinion on liability to Royalty
1. A Contractor may apply to the Secretary-General requesting an opinion of the Authority
on any matter relating to the method of calculation and liability for the payment of a
Royalty or other payment under this Part V.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19 This is one option for the calculation of an annual fixed fee contemplated by the 1994 Implementing
Agreement (Section 8(1)(d)). The methodology for its calculation (and other options) will be considered
at a subsequent payment regime workshop.
20 It would be preferable if the annual rate is adjusted by reference to a relevant price index or
parameters which the Council must take into consideration.
29

[Page 30]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
2. The Secretary-General shall consider any such request under paragraph (1) above and
shall give a written opinion21 to the Contractor accordingly.
3. Any liability by that Contractor under this Part V shall be determined in a manner
consistent with the written opinion of the Secretary-General.
Section 4
Returns, payments and refunds
Draft regulation 26
Reporting Period
The reporting period for the purposes of this Part V is a Calendar Year.
Draft regulation 27
Royalty Returns
1. A Contractor shall submit to the Authority a half-year Royalty Return produced in
accordance with regulation 28 and not later than 90 Days after the end of the calendar
half year in which the date of commencement of Commercial Production occurs and
thereafter not later than 90 Days after the end of each subsequent calendar half year for
the duration of the Exploitation Contract.
2. All returns to the Authority shall be submitted in the format prescribed by the Authority
and shall be signed by a Contractor’s duly authorized representative.
3. A Contractor shall notify the Secretary-General promptly of any error in calculation or
mistake of fact in connection with a Royalty Return.
4. In connection with any joint venture arrangement with the Enterprise, one Royalty Return
shall be submitted by the joint venture.
Draft regulation 28
Information to be submitted
1. Each Royalty Return shall include the following minimum information for the Reporting
Period:
(a) The quantity in wet metric tonnes of [resource / mineral ore] recovered from the
Mining Area;
(b) The quantity and value in dry metric tonnes of the [resource / mineral ore]
Shipped from the Mining Area;
(c) The value and the basis of the valuation of the Minerals sold or removed without
sale from the Mining Area, as verified by an Appropriately Qualified Expert and
supported by a chemical analysis of the ore by a certified laboratory;
(d) Details of all contracts and sale or exchange agreements relating to the mineral
ore removed from the Mining Area.
(e) A calculation of the Royalty Payable for the Reporting Period in accordance with
regulation 24 including any adjustment made to the prior Reporting Period and a
declaration signed by a duly authorized representative of the Contractor that the
Royalty Return is correct.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
21 The legal nature and status of an “opinion” remains for consideration.
30

[Page 31]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
2. In respect of a final Royalty Return for the final Reporting Period ending on the date of
expiry, surrender or termination of the Exploitation Contract, the Contractor shall provide:
(a) A final calculation of the Royalty payable in accordance with regulation 24;
(b) Details of any refund or overpayment of Royalty claimed;
(c) The quantity and value of all closing stocks of the [resource / mineral ore] in the
Mining Area.
3. Within 90 Days of the end of a Calendar Year, the Contractor shall provide to the
Authority a statement by an auditor or certified independent accountant that the Royalty
calculation for that Calendar Year:
(a) Is based is based on proper accounts and records properly kept and is in
agreement with those accounts and records; and
(b) Complies with these regulations and is correct.
4. The Authority may by written notice to a Contractor, reasonably request any other
information to be included in a Royalty Return and the Contractor shall comply with any
such reasonable request.
Draft regulation 29
Payment of Royalty
1. A Contractor shall pay the Royalty due for a Reporting Period within 90 Days following
the end of that Reporting Period.
2. Payments to the Authority may be made in United States dollars or other foreign currency
which is freely convertible.
3. All payments made to the Authority shall be made gross and shall be free of any
deductions, transmission fees, levies or other charges.22
4. The Council may approve the payment of any Royalty due under this Part V by way of
installments where special circumstances exist justifying such payment by installments.
Draft regulation 30
Overpayment of Royalty
1. Where a Royalty Return due for a Reporting Period shows any overpayment of royalties
by a Contractor, that Contractor may apply to the Authority to request a refund of any
such overpayment. Where no such request is received by the Authority within 90 Days of
the due date of submission of the relevant Royalty Return, the Authority shall carry
forward any overpayment and apply it against a future liability under this Part V.
2. Where any final Royalty Return shows an amount to be refunded, the Authority shall
refund such amount provided it is satisfied that such refund is properly due. The Authority
may request such additional information or confirmation, as it considers reasonably
necessary to determine that such refund is correct and due to a Contractor.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
22 It is thought that payments made to the Authority in accordance with the Convention should be made
free of deductions, in particular withholding taxes in accordance with a domestic law. However, this will
likely depend on the nature of the payment made and its treatment under domestic law. As noted by
one Member State it is not possible to provide a definitive answer at this stage; indeed, specific
domestic legislation may be required to provide for gross payments.
31

[Page 32]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Section 5
Records, inspection and audit
Draft regulation 31
Proper books and records to be kept
1. A Contractor shall keep and maintain, at a place agreed between the Contractor and the
Secretary-General, complete and accurate Records relating to the minerals recovered
and to verify and support all returns or any other accounting or financial reports required
by the Authority in relation to the Exploitation Contract.
2. The Contractor shall prepare such records in conformity with IFRS that verify in
connection with each Mining Area inter alia:
(a) Details of the quantity and grade of the minerals recovered from each Mining
Area;
(b) Details of sales, shipments, transfers, exchanges and other disposals of the
minerals from the Mining Area, including the time, destination, value and basis of
valuation and quantity and grade of each sale, shipment, transfer, exchange or
other disposal;
(c) Details of all Eligible Capital Expenditure by category of expenditure incurred in
each Mining Area; and
(d) Details of all revenues and operating costs.
3. A Contractor shall supply and file such Records at such times as may be required by the
Authority under these Regulations.
4. A Contractor shall maintain all Records and make such Records available for inspection
and audit under regulation 32.
Draft regulation 32
Audit and Inspection by the Authority
1. The Authority shall have the right to audit the Contractor’s Records in accordance with
this regulation.
2. Any such audit shall be undertaken at the Authority’s sole cost and shall be performed by
and through a technical and competent Duly Authorized Representative of the Authority,
including an independent professionally qualified auditor.
3. Any Duly Authorized Representative of the Authority shall conduct any inspection or audit
of the Contractor’s Records in a manner that will result in the minimum amount of
inconvenience to a Contractor.
4. In connection with an inspection under regulation 54 a Duly Authorized Representative of
the Authority may in connection with a liability to a Royalty payment:
(a) Inspect the mining and onboard processing facility with a view to verifying the
accuracy of equipment measuring the quantity of mineral ore sold or removed
without sale from the Mining Area;
(b) Inspect any documents available onboard any mining vessel or installation of the
kind mentioned in regulation 54;
(c) Require any duly authorized representative to answer any questions in
connection with the inspection; and
32

[Page 33]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(d) Make and retain copies or extracts of any documents or records relevant to the
subject matter of the inspection and to provide a Contractor with a list of such
copies or extracts.
Draft regulation 33
Appointment of auditor
1. Any Duly Authorized Representative of the Secretary-General, including any certified
independent accountant appointed by the Secretary-General, shall have access, for
purposes of audit and examination, to any books, documents, papers, records and data
of the Contractor which are necessary and directly pertinent to verify compliance with this
Part V.
2. The Contractor shall make available to the Duly Authorized Representative of the
Secretary-General such financial records and information contemplated by paragraph (1)
above as reasonably required by the Secretary-General to determine compliance with
this Part V.
3. Member States shall, to the best of their abilities, co-operate with and assist the
Secretary-General and any Duly Authorized Representative of the Secretary-General, in
the carrying out of any audit under this regulation and facilitate access to, in accordance
with the national law of that Member State, the books and records of a Contractor by a
duly appointed accountant or Duly Appointed Representative of the Authority and to
assist in the exchange of information relevant to a Contractor’s obligations under this Part
V.
Draft regulation 34
Assessment by the Authority
1. Where the Secretary-General is satisfied following any audit under this Part V or
otherwise becomes aware that any Royalty Return is, in respect of any material
particular, not accurate and correct or that any amounts stated are not reasonable, the
Secretary-General may, by written notice to a Contractor, request any additional
information that the Secretary-General considers reasonable in the circumstances
including the report of an auditor.
2. A Contractor shall provide such information requested by the Secretary-General within 60
Days of the date of such request together with any further information the Contractor
requires to the Secretary-General to take into consideration.
3. The Secretary-General may, within 60 Days of the expiry of the period prescribed by
paragraph (2) above, and after giving due consideration to any information submitted
under paragraph (2) above or where no such information is submitted, make an
assessment of any additional royalty liability that the Secretary-General considers ought
to be levied.
4. A Contractor may lodge a written objection to any assessment issued under paragraph
(3) above together with any written representations to the Secretary-General within 60
Days of the date of such assessment.
5. Within 30 Days of the receipt of any written objection under paragraph (4) above, the
Secretary-General shall consider such objection and any representations made by a
33

[Page 34]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Contractor and make a final assessment of any additional royalty liability, together with
any interest and penalty imposed under this Part V.
6. A Contractor shall pay any liability by the date stated on such final assessment, subject
to the Contractor’s to exhaust any judicial remedies available to it under Part X to these
Regulations.
7. The Secretary-General shall submit a report to the Council detailing any assessments
issued under this regulation together with the reasons and information to substantiate
any liability levied by a final assessment.
Draft regulation 35
Confidential information
1. The Secretary-General shall keep confidential all Information provided to the Authority in
the course of an inspection or audit in accordance with regulations 46 and 47.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph (1) above, all payments made by the Contractor to the
Authority under these Regulations, including payments under Part V of these Regulations
shall be deemed non-confidential. All payments made to the Authority by Contractors
shall be published by the Contractor on their website or other publicly accessible forum,
and all payments received by the Authority from Contractors shall be published by the
Authority on its website.
Section 6
Anti-avoidance measures
Draft regulation 36
General anti-avoidance rule
Where the Authority in its reasonable opinion considers that a Contractor has entered into
any scheme, arrangement or understanding or undertakes any steps which, directly or
indirectly:
(a) Results in the avoidance, postponement or reduction of a liability for payment of
a Royalty under this Part V;
(b) Has not been carried out for bona fide commercial purposes; and
(c) Has been carried out solely or mainly for the purposes of avoidance,
postponement or reduction of a liability for payment of a royalty,
then the Authority shall determine the liability for the Royalty as if the avoidance,
postponement or reduction of such liability had not been carried out by the Contractor and in
accordance with regulation 34.
Draft regulation 37
Arm’s length transactions
1. Where applicable and for the purposes of this Part V, all transactions shall be valued
using an arm’s length value.
2. Where the Authority is satisfied that any transaction or contract entered into by a
Contractor, being a transaction or contract relevant to the calculation of any amounts due
34

[Page 35]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
and payable to the Authority under this Part V, has not been entered into at Arm’s
Length, the Authority may, after consultation with a Contractor, adjust a value to an Arm’s
Length Value for this purposes of this Part V.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 2 above, the Authority shall provide the Contractor with
written notice of any proposed adjustment. The Contractor shall be afforded the
opportunity of making written representations to the Authority within 60 Days of the date
of such written notice.
4. In determining any Arm’s Length Value, the Authority may seek the advice of
Appropriately Qualified Experts.
Section 7
Interest and penalties
Draft regulation 38
Interest on unpaid Royalty
Where any Royalty or other amount levied under this Part V remains unpaid after the date it
becomes due and payable, a Contractor shall, in addition to the amount due and payable,
pay interest on the amount outstanding at an annual rate calculated by adding [5]% to the
Special Drawing Rights interest rate prevailing on the date the amount became due and
payable.
Draft regulation 39
Penalty in respect of any under declaration or underpayment
Where any under declaration or underpayment of a Royalty liability is the result of an attempt
to avoid the payment of a royalty under these regulations, a Contractor may be liable to a
penalty not exceeding twice the amount of any under declaration or underpayment or [10
000] United States dollars, whichever is the greater, together with interest imposed under
regulation 38.
Draft regulation 40
Penalty in respect of any failure to deliver or furnish a royalty return
A Contractor who fails to deliver or furnish a Royalty Return required by these Regulations to
be delivered or furnished, may be liable to a penalty not exceeding [10 000] United States
dollars plus a daily penalty of [1 000] United States dollars from the date of a notification of
such failure by the Secretary-General.
Draft regulation 41
Penalty in respect of false royalty returns and information
A Contractor who makes or delivers a Royalty Return or any books, records and information
required by or under these Regulations that is false in a material particular, may be liable to a
penalty not exceeding [10 000] United States dollars.
35

[Page 36]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Draft regulation 42
Recovery from performance guarantee
The Authority may, on written notice to a Contractor, recover and deduct any amounts
outstanding under this Part V from any performance guarantee deposited with the Authority
under regulation 10.
Section 8
Suspension or termination of Contract in respect of unpaid royalty
Draft regulation 43
Suspension or termination of Contract in respect of unpaid royalty
Where a Royalty or Annual Fixed Fee levied under this Part V remains unpaid in respect of
an Exploitation Contract for 6 months or more from the date upon which the amount became
due and payable, the Authority may suspend or terminate that Exploitation Contract in
accordance with the terms of the Exploitation Contract.
Section 9
Disputes regarding Royalty calculations and payments
Draft regulation 44
Disputes regarding Royalty calculations and payments
Either the Authority or the Contractor may submit any dispute arising out of or in connection
with the interpretation of this Part V or the calculation and payment of any amount under this
Part V for consideration by an Appropriately Qualified Expert or panel of experts in
accordance with regulation 57(3), unless both parties agree to settle the dispute by other
means, in accordance with article 188, paragraph 2 of the Convention.
Section 10
Review of payment mechanism
Draft regulation 45
Review of payment mechanism
The payment mechanism under this Part V shall be reviewed in accordance with regulation
59(5).
36

[Page 37]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part VI
Information gathering and handling
Draft Regulation 46
Confidentiality of information23
1. The Exploitation Contract, its schedules and annexes, as may be amended from time to
time in accordance with these Regulations, and the documents and Information required
to be submitted under regulation 4(4) is a public document which the Authority shall
publish on its website, provided that Confidential Information shall be redacted prior to
any such publication.
2. “Confidential Information”24 shall mean:
(a) Information, including (i) industrial secrets, proprietary data or other Information
that has commercial value and which, if disclosed, would [significantly] prejudice
the legitimate commercial interests of a Contractor or offer a competitor a
[significant] competitive advantage; and (ii) that of a private nature relating to
individuals;
(b) Information that has been designated as Confidential Information by a Contractor
in consultation with the Secretary-General under the Exploration Regulations and
which remains Confidential Information in accordance with the Exploration
Regulations;
(c) Information designated as or deemed to be Confidential Information by the
Convention, including personnel matters, health records of individual employees
or other documents in which employees have a reasonable expectation of
privacy and other matters that involve the privacy of individuals;
(d) Information designated as Confidential Information at the time it was disclosed to
the Authority, provided that such designation is deemed to be well-founded on
the basis that there would be substantial risk of serious and unfair economic
prejudice if the data and information were to be released;
(e) Other Information deemed to be Confidential Information under the applicable
law of the Exploitation Contract.
3. There shall be a presumption that any Information regarding the Exploitation Contract, its
schedules and annexes or the activities taken under the Exploitation Contract is public,
other than Confidential Information.
4. The term “Confidential information” does not mean or include Information that:
(a) Is generally known or publicly available from other sources;
(b) Has been previously made available by the owner to others without an obligation
concerning its confidentiality;
(c) Is already in the possession of the Authority with no obligation concerning its
confidentiality;
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
23 The basis for the drafting of this regulation is section 30 of the Model Mine Development Agreement
and the ISA discussion paper on Data and Information Management Considerations Arising Under the
Proposed New Exploitation Regulations, February 2016.
(http://www.isa.org.jm/files/documents/EN/Pubs/DPs/DP2.pdf). Its content should also be considered in
the light of stakeholder submissions in respect of “confidentiality” and transparency.
24 “Confidential Information” will be included as a defined term at regulation 1 once the overall
mechanism and language has been agreed.
37

[Page 38]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(d) Is reasonably required by the Authority in connection with an Incident where
disclosure is required to protect the Marine Environment and / or human health
and safety;
(e) Information necessary for the formulation by the Authority of rules, regulations
and procedures concerning protection and preservation of the marine
environment and safety, other than proprietary equipment design data;25
(f) Is Environmental Information;
(g) Is an award or judgment in connection with activities in the Area (save in relation
to any Confidential Information contained in such award or judgment which may
be redacted);
or where:
(h) The Contractor to which the Information relates has given prior written consent to
its disclosure;
(i) The area to which the Information relates is no longer covered by an Exploitation
Contract;
(j) Following the expiration of a period of [5] years, Confidential Information shall no
longer be deemed to be such unless the Contractor that submitted it can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Secretary-General that it continues to
satisfy the definition of Confidential Information under this regulation.
5. Confidential Information will be retained by the Authority and the Contractor in strictest
confidence in accordance with regulation 47 and shall not be disclosed to any third party
without the express prior written consent of the other party, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed, save that:
(a) Confidential Information may be used by the Secretary-General and staff of the
Authority’s Secretariat, as authorized by the Secretary-General, and by members
of the Commission as necessary for and relevant to the effective exercise of their
powers and functions; and
(b) Confidential Information submitted to the Authority by the Contractor under a
previous contract for Exploration relating to any part of the Contract Area, shall
be subject to this regulation.
6. In connection with this regulation, a Contractor shall on transferring Information to the
Authority designate by notice in writing to the Secretary-General the Information or any
part of its as Confidential Information. If the Secretary-General objects to such
designation within a period of 30 Days, the parties shall consult upon the nature of the
Information and whether it constitutes Confidential Information under this regulation. Any
dispute arising as to the nature of the Information shall be deemed a technical dispute
and shall be referred by the parties for consideration by an Appropriately Qualified Expert
or panel of experts in accordance with regulation 57(3).
7. All payments made by the Contractor to the Authority under these Regulations, including
payments made pursuant to Part V of these Regulations shall be deemed non-
confidential. All payments made to the Authority by Contractors shall be published by the
Contractor on their website or other publicly accessible forum, and all payments received
by the Authority from Contractors shall be published by the Authority on its website.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
25 This provision reflects the content of Annex III, Article 14(2) of the Convention.
38

[Page 39]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Draft Regulation 47
Procedures to ensure confidentiality
The Secretary-General shall be responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of all
Confidential Information in accordance with the Authority’s policy and procedures relating to
information management.
Draft Regulation 48
Information to be submitted on expiration of the Contract
1. The Contractor shall transfer to the Authority all data and information that are required for
the effective exercise of the powers and functions of the Authority in respect of the
Contract Area in accordance with the provisions of this regulation.
2 Upon termination of an Exploitation Contract, the Contractor, if it has not already done
so, shall submit the following data and information to the Secretary-General:
[To be completed].
39

[Page 40]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part VII
General Provisions
Draft Regulation 49
Notice and general procedures
1. For the purpose of this regulation:
(a) “communication” means any application, request, notice, report, consent,
approval, waiver, direction or instruction required or made under these
Regulations; and
(b) “designated representative” means the person so-named on behalf of a
Contractor on the Seabed Mining Register.
2. Any communication must be made by the Secretary-General or by the designated
representative of the Applicant or Contractor, as the case may be, in writing.
3. Service of any communication must be made:
(a) By hand, fax, registered mail or e-mail containing an authorized electronic
signature,
(b) To the Secretary-General at the headquarters of the Authority or to the
designated representative at the address stated on the seabed mining register,
as the case may be.
4. The requirement to provide any information in writing under these Regulations is satisfied
by the provision of the information in an electronic document containing a digital
signature.
5. Delivery by hand is deemed to be effective when made. Delivery by fax is deemed to be
effective when the “transmit confirmation report” confirming the transmission to the
recipient’s published fax number is received by the transmitter. Delivery by registered
airmail is deemed to be effective 21 Days after posting; and delivery by e-mail is deemed
to be effective when the e-mail enters an information system designated or used by the
addressee for the purpose of receiving documents of the type sent and is capable of
being retrieved and processed by the addressee.
6. Notice to the designated representative of the Applicant or Contractor shall constitute
effective notice to the Applicant or Contractor for all purposes under these Regulations,
and the designated representative shall be the agent of the Applicant or Contractor for
the service of process or notification in any proceeding of any court or tribunal having
jurisdiction.
7. Notice to the Secretary-General shall constitute effective notice to the Authority for all
purposes under these Regulations, and the Secretary-General is the Authority’s agent for
the service of process or notification in any proceeding of any court or tribunal having
jurisdiction.
Draft Regulation 50
Recommendations for the guidance of Contractors
1. The Commission may from time to time issue Recommendations of a technical or
administrative nature for the guidance of Contractors to assist in the implementation of
the Rules of the Authority.
40

[Page 41]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
2. The full text of such Recommendations shall be reported to the Council. Should the
Council find that a recommendation is inconsistent with the intent and purpose of these
Regulations, it may request that the recommendation be modified or withdrawn.
Draft Regulation 51
Duty to cooperate and exchange of information
In matters relating to these Regulations:
(a) Member States shall co-operate with the Authority to provide such data and
information as is reasonably necessary for the Authority to discharge its duties
and responsibilities under the Convention;
(b) The Authority shall develop, implement and promote effective and transparent
communication, public information, and public participation procedures in
accordance with Good Industry Practice.
(c) Authority members and contractors shall cooperate with the Authority;
(d) The Authority shall consult and co-operate with sponsoring States, flag States
and competent international organizations, as appropriate, on measures to
promote safety of life and property at sea and the protection of the Marine
Environment; and
(e) The Authority shall put in place appropriate measures with sponsoring States,
flag States and competent international organizations relating to the exchange of
information and data to facilitate compliance with and enforcement of generally
accepted international rules and standards.
Draft Regulation 52
Rights of coastal States
1. Nothing in these Regulations shall affect the rights of coastal States in accordance with
article 142 and other relevant provisions of the Convention.
2. Any coastal State which has grounds for believing that any activity in the Area by a
Contractor is likely to cause serious harm or a threat of serious harm to the marine
environment under its jurisdiction or sovereignty may notify the Secretary- General in
writing of the grounds upon which such belief is based. The Secretary-General shall
provide the Contractor and its sponsoring State or States with a reasonable opportunity
to examine the evidence, if any, provided by the coastal State as the basis for its belief.
The Contractor and its sponsoring State or States may submit their observations thereon
to the Secretary-General within a reasonable time.
3. If there are clear grounds for believing that serious harm to the marine environment is
likely to occur, the Secretary-General shall act in accordance with regulation [emergency
orders] and, if necessary, shall take immediate measures of a temporary nature as
provided for in regulation [emergency orders].
4. Contractors shall take all measures necessary to ensure that their activities are
conducted so as not to cause serious harm to the marine environment, including, but not
restricted to, pollution, under the jurisdiction or sovereignty of coastal States, and that
such serious harm or pollution arising from incidents or activities in its exploration area
does not spread beyond such area.
41

[Page 42]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Draft regulation 53
Other applicable fees
1. A Contractor shall pay to the Authority the applicable processing fee in the amount for in
Annex IX to these Regulations.
2. The amount of such processing fees will be determined by a decision of the Council, and
reviewed on a regular basis by the Council in order to ensure that it covers the Authority’s
expected administrative costs of processing.
3. The fee will be a fixed amount expressed in United States dollars or its equivalent in a
freely convertible currency, to be paid in full at the time of the submission of the relevant
application or request for approval.
4. The Authority is not obliged to carry out any action in respect of a relevant application or
request for approval under these Regulations, until the prescribed fee has been paid.
42

[Page 43]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part VIII
Inspection
Draft Regulation 54
Inspectorate26
1. The Authority shall establish appropriate mechanisms for establishing a staff of
Inspectors who shall inspect activities in the Area to determine whether the provisions of
Part XI of the Convention, the Agreement, the Rules of the Authority and the terms and
conditions of any Exploitation Contract with the Authority are being complied with.
2. The Contractor shall permit the Authority to send its Inspectors [and observers]27 on
board vessels and Installations, whether off-shore or on-shore, used by the Contractor to
carry out Exploitation Activities under an Exploitation Contract to :
(a) Determine the Contractor’s compliance with the provisions of Part XI of the
Convention, the Agreement, the Rules of the Authority and the terms and
conditions of its Exploitation Contract ;
(b) Monitor the effects of Exploitation Activities on the Marine Environment and
human health and safety;
(c) Monitor the recovery on-board of Minerals, any other Natural Resources of the
Area; and
(d) Monitor all other aspects of a Contractors’ operations as required by the
Authority in its administration and management of activities in the Area.
3. The Secretary-General shall give reasonable notice to the Contractor of the projected
time and duration of inspections, the name of the Inspectors and any activities the
Inspectors are to perform that are likely to require the availability of special equipment or
special assistance from personnel of the Contractor.
4. Such Inspectors shall have the authority to inspect any vessel or Installation, including its
log, personnel, equipment, records, facilities, and all other recorded data, samples, and
any relevant documents or items which are necessary to monitor the Contractor’s
compliance.
5. The Contractor, its agents and employees shall assist the Inspectors in the performance
of their duties and shall:
(a) Accept and facilitate prompt and safe boarding and disembarkation of vessels
and Installations by Inspectors;
(b) Cooperate with and assist in the inspection of any vessel or Installation
conducted pursuant to these Regulations and the [Seabed Directorate
Regulations];
(c) Provide access to all relevant areas, items and personnel on vessels and
Installations at all reasonable times;
(d) Provide access to books, documents, papers and records which are necessary
and directly pertinent to verify the expenditures referred to in the Plan of Work
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
26 It is proposed that an Inpsectorate mechanism and function will be established under separate
“Seabed Directorate Regulations” including the appropriate powers, functions and accountability of an
inspectorate and its inspectors.
27 Given the remoteness of activities in the Area, a permanent observer mechanism may be preferable /
in addition to inspectors given logistical arrangements in getting Inspectors to and from mining
locations.
43

[Page 44]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
and necessary to determine compliance with the financial payments due under
the Exploitation Contract and these Regulations;
(e) Not obstruct, intimidate or interfere with Inspectors in the performance of their
duties; and
provide reasonable facilities, including, where appropriate, food and
accommodation, to Inspectors.
6. Inspectors shall avoid interference with the safe and normal operations of the Contractor,
and shall act in accordance with these Regulations and the Authority’s policy and
procedures relating to health and safety and information management.
7. Acts of violence, intimidation, abuse against or the wilful obstruction of an Inspector by
any person, or the failure by a Contractor to comply with this regulation, shall be reported
to the sponsoring State and the flag State of any vessel or installation concerned, for
consideration of institution of proceedings under national law.
44

[Page 45]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part IX
Enforcement and penalties
Draft Regulation 55
Compliance notice
1. At any time, if it appears to the Authority that a Contractor is in breach of the provisions of
Part XI of the Convention, the Agreement, the Rules of the Authority or the terms and
conditions of its Exploitation Contract it may direct the Secretary-General to issue a
compliance notice to the Contractor requiring the Contractor to take such action as may
be specified in the compliance notice.
2. A compliance notice shall:
(a) Describe the alleged breach and the factual basis for it;
(b) Require the Contractor to take remedial action or other such steps as the
Authority considers reasonably appropriate to ensure compliance within a
specified time period; and
(c) In respect of a violation specified in Annex VIII to these Regulations, impose the
applicable monetary penalty.
3. The Authority may not execute [save in the case of emergency orders under Article
162(2))(w) of the Convention] a decision involving monetary penalties until the Contractor
has been accorded a reasonable opportunity to exhaust the judicial remedies available to
it pursuant to Part XI, section 5, of the Convention.
4. For the purposes of Article 18, Annex III of the Convention, a compliance notice issued
under this regulation constitutes a warning by the Authority.
Draft Regulation 56
Power to take remedial action
1. Where a Contractor fails to take action required under regulation 55, the Authority may
carry out any remedial works or take such measures, as it considers reasonably
necessary to prevent or mitigate the effects or potential effects of a Contractor’s failure in
complying with the terms and conditions of an Exploitation Contract.
2. If the Authority takes remedial action or measures under paragraph 1, the reasonable
costs and expenses incurred by the Authority in taking that action are a debt due to the
Authority by the person or persons whose failure to comply with the compliance notice
led to that action.
45

[Page 46]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part X Settlement of disputes28
Draft regulation 57
Administrative review mechanism
1. Any Contractor, who reasonably considers that in the performance of functions or duties
under these Regulations, any Duly Authorized Representative (s) of the Authority has
acted in a manner inconsistent with or in contravention of the Rules of the Authority, may
apply for an administrative review of any decision made or action taken on behalf of the
Authority against a Contractor.
2. Any request for an administrative review in relation to these Regulations shall be made to
the Secretary-General who shall cause the matter to be investigated in accordance with
the Authority’s administrative review procedures.
3. Where the Secretary-General or the Contractor reasonably considers that the subject
matter of the review includes a matter of a technical nature, the matter may be referred to
a mutually agreed Appropriately Qualified Expert or panel of experts for resolution to
advise the reviewer on that technical matter. The costs of any such determination shall
be borne equally by the Authority and the Contractor.
4. Nothing in this regulation shall restrict the Authority’s or the Contractor’s recourse to the
settlement of any dispute in accordance with regulation 58.
Draft Regulation 58
Settlement of disputes
1. Disputes concerning the interpretation or application of these Regulations and an
Exploitation Contract shall be settled in accordance with Part XI, section 5, of the
Convention.
2. In accordance with article 21 (2) of Annex III to the Convention, any final decision
rendered by a court or tribunal having jurisdiction under the Convention relating to the
rights and obligations of the Authority and of the Contractor shall be enforceable in the
territory of any State party to the Convention affected thereby.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
28 To be revised / considered in the light of ISA discussion paper Dispute Resolution Considerations
Arising Under the Proposed New Exploitation Regulations, February 2016 and further stakeholder
deliberation.
46

[Page 47]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part XI
Review of the Authority’s Regulations
Draft Regulation 59
Review of the Authority’s Regulations
1. Five years following the approval of these Regulations by the Assembly, or at any time
thereafter, the Council shall undertake a review of the manner in which the Regulations
have operated in practice.
2. If, in the light of improved knowledge or technology, it becomes apparent that the
Regulations are not adequate, any State party, the Legal and Technical Commission or
any contractor through its sponsoring State may at any time request the Council to
consider, at its next ordinary session, revisions to these Regulations.
3. In the light of the review, the Council may adopt and apply provisionally, pending
approval by the Assembly, amendments to the provisions of these Regulations, taking
into account the recommendations of the Legal and Technical Commission or other
subordinate organs concerned. Any such amendments shall be without prejudice to the
rights conferred on any contractor with the Authority under the provisions of an
exploitation contract entered into pursuant to these Regulations in force at the time of any
such amendment.
4. In the event that any provisions of these Regulations are amended, the contractor and
the Authority may revise the Exploitation Contract in accordance with section 39 of Annex
VII.
5. Notwithstanding the review period contemplated by paragraph (1) above, the Council
may review the system of payments adopted under Part V to these Regulations [following
the expiration of [x] years of the approval of these Regulations].29
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
29 This paragraph will require additional consideration not least its potential, if any, to impact any
financial terms of an exploitation contract during the initial period as a payment mechanism evolves.
47

[Page 48]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annexures
Annex I
Application for approval of a Plan of Work to obtain an Exploitation Contract
Section I Information concerning the Applicant
1. Name of Applicant:
2. Street address of Applicant:
3. Postal address (if different from above):
4. Telephone number:
5. Fax number:
6. E-mail address:
7. Name of Applicant’s designated representative:
8. Street address of Applicant’s designated representative (if different from above):
9. Postal address (if different from above):
10. Telephone number:
11. Fax number:
12. E-mail address:
13. If the Applicant is a juridical person:
a. Identify Applicant’s place of registration;
b. Identify Applicant’s principal place of business/domicile;
c. Attach a copy of Applicant’s certificate of registration.
14. Identify the sponsoring State or States.
15. In respect of each sponsoring State, provide the date of deposit of its instrument of
ratification of, or accession or succession to, the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 and the date of its consent to be bound by the
Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the Convention.
16. Attach a certificate of sponsorship issued by the sponsoring State.
Section II Financial information
17. Attach sufficient information to enable the Council to determine whether the Applicant
is financially capable of carrying out the proposed Plan of Work and of fulfilling its
financial obligations to the Authority:
(a) If the application is made by the Enterprise, attach certification by its competent
authority that the Enterprise has the necessary financial Resources to meet the
estimated costs of the proposed Plan of Work;
(b) If the application is made by a State or a State enterprise, attach a statement by
the State or the sponsoring State certifying that the Applicant has the necessary
financial Resources to meet the estimated costs of the proposed Plan of Work;
(c) If the application is made by an entity, attach copies of the Applicant’s audited
financial statements, including balance sheets and income statements and cash
flow statements, for the most recent three years in conformity with IFRS and
certified by a duly qualified firm of public accountants; and
48

[Page 49]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
i. if the Applicant is a newly organized entity and a certified balance
sheet is not available, a pro forma balance sheet certified by an
appropriate official of the Applicant;
ii. if the Applicant is a subsidiary of another entity, copies of such
financial statements of that entity and a statement from that entity in
conformity with IFRS and certified by a duly qualified firm of public
accountants that the Applicant will have the financial resources to carry
out the Plan of Work;
iii. if the Applicant is controlled by a State or a State enterprise, a
statement from the State or State enterprise certifying that the
Applicant will have the financial resources to carry out the Plan of
Work.
18. Subject to regulation 31, where an Applicant seeking approval of a Plan of Work
intends to finance the proposed Plan of Work by borrowing, its application shall include
the amount of such borrowing, the repayment period and the interest rate together with
the terms and conditions of any security, charge, mortgage or pledge made or
provided, or intended to be made or provided or imposed by any financial institution in
respect of such borrowing.
19. Details of any financial guarantee or security proposed or to be provided by the
Applicant in accordance with these Regulations or the Environmental Regulations.
Section III Undertakings
20. Attach a written undertaking that the Applicant will:
(a) Accept as enforceable and comply with the applicable obligations created by the
provisions of the Convention and the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Authority, the decisions of the relevant organs of the Authority and the terms of
its contracts with the Authority;
(b) Accept control by the Authority of activities in the Area as authorized by the
Convention;
(c) Provide the Authority with a written assurance that its obligations under the
Exploitation Contract will be fulfilled in good faith; and
(d) Not engage in any unfair economic practices and has not accepted nor will
accept any subsidies other than those permitted under the agreements referred
to in Annex, Section 6(1)(b) of the Agreement and will, at the earliest available
opportunity, make known to the Secretary-General any practice that has
contravened or is likely to be in contravention of Annex, Section 6(1)(b) of the
Agreement; and
Section IV Previous contracts with the Authority
21. Where the Applicant or, in the case of an application by a partnership or consortium of
entities in a joint arrangement, any member of the partnership or consortium, has
previously been awarded any contract with the Authority, the application shall include:
(a) The date of the previous contract or contracts;
(b) The dates, reference numbers and titles of each report submitted to the Authority
in connection with the contract or contracts; and
49

[Page 50]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(c) The date of termination of the contract or contracts, if applicable.
Section V Attachments
22. List all the attachments and annexes to this Application (all data and information
should be submitted in hard copy and in a digital format specified by the Authority).
50

[Page 51]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annex II
Feasibility Study
1. A Feasibility Study must:
(a) be prepared on the basis of sound engineering and economic principles in
accordance with good industry practice;
(b) provide appropriate and sufficient information and data to assess the commercial
and economic viability of the proposed Exploitation Activities;
(c) be accompanied by the report of an Appropriately Qualified Expert, including a
mining engineer, verifying its contents; and
(d) reflect the minimum data and information required in this Annex II below and
adhere to any guidelines issued by the Commission under these regulations.
(e) Content of Feasibility Study:
A. Executive Summary
a. Location and project description
b. Geology and Mineral Resources
c. Mineral Resources
I. Proven and probable reserves
II. Production schedule
III. Mine operating costs: summary
IV. Mine capital cost summary
V. Metallurgy and processing
VI. Project economics
VII. Other relevant data
VIII. Comments by independent reviewer
B. Area description and location
a. Co-ordinates
b. Size
C. Geological settings
D. Exploration activities
E. Data acquisition
F. Data verification
G. Adjacent areas
H. Mineral resource and reserve estimates
a. An estimate, together with confidence levels of mineable reserves in
accordance with the Reporting standard of the International Seabed
Authority for mineral exploration results assessments, mineral
resources and mineral reserves together with a comprehensive
report of an independent expert including details of and validation of
the grade and quality of the proven, probable ore reserves and an
evaluation of inferred Resources;
I. Mining methods, technology and design
a. Sequential mining plan
b. Details of the equipment and methods expected to be used in
carrying out the proposed Plan of Work including the results of tests
51

[Page 52]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
conducted and other relevant information about the characteristics of
such technology
I. Production support vessel
II. Seafloor production tools
III. Lifting and de-watering systems
c. Details of technology to be deployed for remote supervision of the
Exploitation Activities
J. Development plan and schedule (Pre-Commercial Production)
a. Details of activities to be undertaken prior to the commencement of
Commercial Production (the development plan)
b. The estimated date of commencement of Commercial Production
K. Production plan and schedule (Post Commercial Production)
a. A sequential production plan for / by Mining Area(s) demonstrating
the optimum recovery of the Resources
b. A detailed production plan, showing an anticipated production
schedule which shall include the estimated maximum amounts of
Minerals that would be produced per year under the Plan of Work,30
by Mining Area, where applicable.
L. Tailings and waste disposal
a. Resource management and conservation: a waste management
plan
b. Plans for the disposal of tailings from the ore processing and of
waste rock and materials from Exploitation Activities in the Area
c. De-watering plan
M. Proposed surface, subsurface and seabed infrastructure
N. Transportation and Downstream processing
a. A description of the transportation,
b. An initial processing plan and description of the marketing of the
metals within and downstream of the Area, including expected
recovery rates of ore and mineral products. A description of the
technology process to be used in each case, with the results of any
laboratory or other tests designed to identify technologically
appropriate methods for processing the ore or ores involved
O. Decommissioning and closure
P. Human Resources: management, operations and administration
a. details of the Applicant’s previous experience, knowledge, skills,
technical qualifications and expertise relevant to the proposed Plan
of Work, including an organization chart and qualifications of key
personnel
b. Details of any sub-contractors or agents to be used by the
Contractor and the terms and conditions of engagement of such sub-
contractors or agents
Q. Risk Assessment and management
a. Operational
b. Environmental
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
30 Wording in italics from Annex, section 6(1)(e) of the Agreement.
52

[Page 53]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
c. Market
d. [Details of hazards identified and relevant hazard classification
system(s) based on International Recognized Standards]
R. Emergency response
a. Details of the Applicant’s financial and technical capability to respond
to any Incident or activity which causes serious harm to the Marine
Environment
b. [Details of the Applicant’s emergency response plan]
S. Environment
a. details of the Applicant’s environmental management system(s) and
applicable standards adopted
b. Management and monitoring plans and implementation
T. Mine Closure Plan
a. Objectives and plan
b. Risk Assessment
c. Financial provision
d. Post closure maintenance and monitoring
e. Completion criteria
U. Data, information and specimen storage
V. Business case: Economic and financial analysis of mine models
[including cash flows and sensitivity analyses]
a. Detailed estimates, under various economic and financial scenarios,
of the economic life of the Mining Area(s)
b. Production estimates
c. Revenue estimates
d. Development cost estimates
e. Capital expenditure estimates
f. Operating cost estimates
g. [Tailings disposal cost estimates]
h. Onboard processing cost estimates
i. Environmental management, monitoring and mitigation cost
estimates
j. Marine research cost estimates
k. Insurance costs by category (and deductibles)
l. Training and social corporate governance cost estimates
m. Downstream processing, marketing and other cost estimates
n. Waste management costs
o. De-commissioning and closure costs
p. Payments to the Authority
q. Payments to other bodies, including fees and other fiscal obligations
r. Accounting methods and standards
s. Sourcing of project Resources and equipment
t. Other material factors, inputs and assumptions
u. [all cost estimates to be accurate to within fifteen percent]
W. Financing
53

[Page 54]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
a. Details of the Applicants financial Resources or proposed
mechanisms to finance the Exploitation Activities
b. Terms and conditions of any third party financing and funding
c. Restrictions
X. Performance guarantees and environmental bonds
Y. Insurance
a. Details of proposed marine insurance policies by category including
environmental liability insurance
b. Insurance providers, deductibles and details of re-insurance
arrangements
Z. International marketing analysis and plans
a. Market study for the [Minerals / metals] to be produced in the Mining
Area
AA. Trade and other agreements
a. Details of sales agreements, including forward sales agreements,
entered into and proposed including main terms and conditions
BB. Host country and Sponsoring State requirements
CC. Consultations held / Socio-economic considerations
DD. Proposed training and social corporate governance
EE. Compliance with international and national laws
a. Regulatory compliance
b. Regulatory compliance record
I. The environmental record of the Applicant, including the
result of environmental audits and reports
c. Details of other permits required for Exploitation Activities
FF. Operational health and safety
a. Details of the Applicant’s health and safety management system and
applicable standards adopted
b. Training
GG. Sub-Contractors
a. Details of sub-Contractors to be used for Exploitation Activities
HH. Conclusions
II. Annexures
a. Qualified and competent persons reports, certification and
verification
b. Tables
c. Figures / diagrams
54

[Page 55]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annex III
Mining Plan
1. The details of the mineral resource to which the application relates with regard to the type
of mineral or Minerals to be exploited, its locality, abundance, geology and mineral
content;
2. The boundaries of the Proposed Mining Area(s) and proposed Contract Area under
application by attaching a chart (on a scale and projection specified by the Authority) and
a list of geographical coordinates (in accordance with the World Geodetic System WGS
84).
3. Sequential Mining plan including applicable timeframes and scheduling of development
and Exploitation phases of the proposed Exploitation Activities;
4. Technically and economically justified estimate of the period required for the Exploitation
of the resource category to which the application relates;
5. Expenditure schedules;
6. Mining methods;
7. Production estimates: A detailed production plan, showing an anticipated production
schedule which shall include the estimated maximum amounts of Minerals that would be
produced per year under the Plan of Work,31 by Mining Area, where applicable
8. Performance guarantees;
9. Training;
10. Downstream processing and marketing (metal recovery);
11. Waste management;
12. Trade considerations;
13. Personnel and staffing
14. Data and specimen storage;
15. Corporate social responsibility.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
31 Wording in italics from Annex, section 6(1)(e) of the Agreement.
55

[Page 56]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annex IV
Financing Plan
A Financing Plan must:
(a) Adhere to any guidelines issued by the Commission under these Regulations;
(b) Include such provisions as the Applicant may determine consistent with its
commercial requirements;
(c) Reflect the funding of the proposed financial commitments of the Feasibility
Study including the Expenditure Conditions; and
(d) Demonstrate how the application intends to raise the finance necessary to
implement the Financing Plan.
(e) [need to prescribe content more fully].
56

[Page 57]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annex V
Emergency Response and Contingency Plan
An Emergency Response and Contingency Plan must:
(a) adhere to any guidelines issued by the Commission under these Regulations and
the Environmental Regulations; and
(b) provide an effective plan of action for the Applicant’s efficient response to
Incidents, including processes by which the Applicant will work in close co-
operation with the Authority, affected or potentially affected coastal States, other
competent international organizations and, where applicable, emergency
response organizations.
57

[Page 58]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annex VI
Exploitation Contract and Schedules
THIS CONTRACT made the … day of … between the INTERNATIONAL SEABED
AUTHORITY represented by its SECRETARY-GENERAL (hereinafter referred to as “the
Authority”) and … represented by … (hereinafter referred to as “the Contractor”)
WITNESSETH as follows:
A. Incorporation of clauses
The standard clauses set out in Annex VII to the Regulations on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area shall be incorporated herein and shall have effect as if herein set out
at length.
B. Contract Area
For the purposes of this Contract, the “Contract Area” means that part of the Area
allocated to the Contractor for Exploitation Activities, defined by the coordinates listed in
schedule 1 hereto.
C. Grant of rights
In consideration of:
(a) their mutual interest in the conduct of Exploitation Activities in the Contract Area
pursuant to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10
December 1982 and the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of
the Convention,
(b) the responsibility of the Authority to organize and control activities in the Area,
particularly with a view to administering the Resources of the Area, in
accordance with the legal regime established in Part XI of the Convention and
the Agreement and Part XII of the Convention, respectively, and
(c) the interest and financial commitment of the Contractor in conducting activities in
the Contract Area and the mutual covenants made herein,
the Authority hereby grants to the Contractor the exclusive right to exploit [mineral
category] solely in the Contract Area in accordance with the terms and conditions of this
Contract.
D. Entry into force and Contract term
This Contract shall enter into force on signature by both parties and, subject to the
standard clauses, shall remain in force for an initial period of [x] years thereafter unless the
Contract is sooner terminated, provided that this Contract may be renewed in accordance
with the Regulations.
E. Entire agreement
This Contract expresses the entire agreement between the parties, and no oral
understanding or prior writing shall modify the terms hereof.
F. Languages
This Contract will be provided and executed in the [ ] and English languages and both
texts are valid.
58

[Page 59]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by the respective
parties, have signed this Contract at …, this … day of … .
The Schedules
Schedule 1
[Coordinates and illustrative chart of the Contract Area and Mining Areas].
Schedule 2
[Coordinates and illustrative chart of the environmental impact area(s) together with the
impact reference areas, preservation reference areas and sampling stations approved in
accordance with the Environmental Regulations].
Schedule 3
[The approved Mining Plan].
Schedule 4
[The approved Financing Plan].
Schedule 5
[The approved Emergency Response and Contingency Plan]
Schedule 6
[The approved Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan].
Schedule 7
[The approved initial Closure Plan].
Schedule 8
[The approved Training Plan].
Schedule 9
[Terms and conditions agreed between the Authority and the Contractor during the
Application approval process].
Schedule 10
[Where applicable under regulation 10, the form of any Performance Guarantee and Security
and its related terms and conditions].
Schedule 11
[Agreed review dates for individual plans together with any specific terms attaching to a
review]
Schedule 12
[To the extent that any documentation is not available at the point of signing the Contract and
a timeframe for submission has been agreed with the Authority, this should be reflected here
with deadline dates].
59

[Page 60]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annex VII
Standard Clauses for Exploitation Contract
Section 1
Definitions
1.1 In the following clauses:
(a) “Regulations” means the Regulations on Exploitation for Mineral Resources
in the Area, adopted by the Authority.
(b) “Environmental Regulations” means the Regulations on Exploration and
Exploitation for Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters).
(c) “Production tests” means those tests conducted by the Contractor during the
development phase of Exploitation to assess the capacity of the mining equipment, as set out
in the Mining Plan.
1.2 Terms and phrases defined in the Regulations shall have the same meaning in these
Standard Clauses.
1.3 In accordance with the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, its provisions and
Part XI of the Convention are to be interpreted and applied together as a single instrument;
this Contract and references in this Contract to the Convention are to be interpreted and
applied accordingly.
1.4 This Contract includes the Schedules to this Contract, which shall be an integral part
hereof.
Section 2
Undertakings
2.1 The Contractor and the Authority shall comply with the Regulations and the
Environmental Regulations, the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority and the
decisions of the relevant organs of the Authority.
2.2 It is a [fundamental] term of this Contract that the Contractor will implement, in
accordance with Good Industry Practice, the:
(a) Mining Plan;
(b) Financing Plan;
(c) Emergency Response and Contingency Plan;
(d) Training Plan;
(e) Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan;
(f) Closure Plan; and
(g) Health, safety and maritime security plan,
(collectively, the “Plan of Work”)
that are appended as Schedules to this Contract, as may be amended from time to time in
accordance with the Regulations.
2.3 The Contractor agrees to:
(a) Accept control by the Authority of activities in the Area as authorized by the
Convention;
(b) Fulfil its obligations under this Contract in good faith;
60

[Page 61]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
(c) Observe any Recommendations which may be issued from time to time by
the Legal and Technical Commission;
(d) Comply with the requirements of any inspection under in accordance with the
Rules of the Authority;
(e) Comply with the requirements of the Authority in connection with a review of
activities under this Contract in accordance with the Regulations and Schedule 11 to this
Contract;
(f) Carry out its obligations under this Contract with:
i. due diligence, efficiency and economy;
ii. due regard to the impact of its activities on the Marine Environment;
and
iii. reasonable regard for other activities in the Marine Environment.
(g) Comply with any Compliance Notice issued pursuant to regulation 55;
(h) Meet or exceed the minimum expenditure commitments specified in the
Mining Plan;
(i) Maintain at its expense, comprehensive insurance in accordance with
section 8 hereof with respect to the Exploitation Activities, and provide copies or access to
relevant certificates and whole policies upon the Authority’s request;
(j) Pay all fees required or amounts falling due to the Authority under the
Regulations;
(k) Make payments due to the Authority in accordance with Part V of the
Regulations;
(l) Submit annual reports to the Authority in accordance with the requirements
of section 19; and
(m) [other].
2.4 The Authority undertakes to fulfil in good faith its powers and functions under the
Convention and the Agreement in accordance with article 157 of the Convention.
2.5 The Contractor undertakes that it will not engage in any unfair economic practices
and has not accepted nor will accept any subsidies other than those permitted under the
agreements referred to in Annex, Section 6(1)(b) of the Agreement and will, at the earliest
available opportunity, make known to the Secretary-General any practice that has
contravened or is likely to be in contravention of Annex, Section 6(1)(b) of the Agreement.
Section 3
Security of tenure and exclusivity
3.2 The Contractor shall have security of tenure and this Contract shall not be
suspended, terminated or revised except in accordance with section 39.
3.3 The Contractor shall have the exclusive right under this Contract to exploit the
resource category and to conduct Exploitation Activities within the Contract Area in
accordance with the Rules of the Authority.
3.4 The Authority undertakes not to grant any rights to another person to explore for or
exploit the same resource category in the Contract Area for the duration of this Contract.
3.5 The Authority reserves the right to enter into contracts with third parties with respect
to Resources other than resource category specified in this Contract but shall endeavour to ensure
61

[Page 62]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
that no other entity operates in the Contract Area for a different category of Resources in a
manner that might unreasonably interfere with the Exploitation Activities of the Contractor.
Section 4
Legal title to Minerals
4.1 The Contractor will obtain title to and property over the Minerals upon recovery of the
Resources in compliance with this Contract at the point of extraction from the Contract Area.
4.2 This Contract shall not create, nor be deemed to confer, any interest or right on the
Contractor in or over any other part of the Area and its Resources other than those rights
expressly granted in this Contract.
Section 5
Reasonable regard for other activities in the Marine Environment
The Contractor shall carry out Exploitation Activities under this Contract with reasonable
regard for other activities in the Marine Environment in accordance with Article 147 of the
Convention and the approved Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure
Plan and any generally accepted international rules and standards established by competent
international organizations.
Section 6
Diligent operations
The Contractor shall, in accordance with this Contract:
(a) Conduct Exploitation Activities with due diligence, efficiency and the
avoidance of unnecessary waste in the Contract Area;
(b) Adhere to every aspect of the Plan of Work;
(c) Provide sufficient training, supervision and resources to its employees,
agents, officers, associates and sub-contractors to ensure compliance with the obligations of
the Contractor;
(d) Exercise proactive due diligence to safeguard the health, safety and welfare
of persons employed or engaged in Exploitation Activities;
(e) Ensure the effective protection of the Marine Environment from harmful
activities and monitor the impact of the Exploitation Activities and ensure that they do not
cause serious harm to the Marine Environment;
(f) Implement the environmental management of the Exploitation Activities,
including relevant mitigation and prevention measures;
(g) Ensure the protection of submarine cables or pipelines in the Contract Area.
Section 7
Avoiding Incidents
7.1 The Contractor shall not, without obtaining the prior written consent of the Authority,
proceed or continue with Exploitation Activities if the Contractor is aware of evidence that
proceeding or continuing makes it reasonably foreseeable that an Incident would occur.
62

[Page 63]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
7.2 The Contractor shall at all times during the conduct of Exploitation Activities be
prepared to implement the Emergency Procedures and Contingency Plan in accordance with
Good Industry Practice and any reasonable requirements of the Authority.
Section 8
Insurance
8.1 The Contractor shall maintain in full force, and, where applicable effect and cause its
sub-contractors to maintain, appropriate insurance policies, with internationally recognized
and financially sound carriers, on such terms and in such amounts in accordance with
generally accepted international maritime practice and as is consistent with Good Industry
Practice, sufficient to cover claims made during:
(a) The duration of this Contract; and
(b) [In respect of environmental liability insurance for a period of [5] years
following the expiration of this Contract].
8.2 Should the Authority become aware that a Contractor has failed to comply with
paragraph 8.1 above, purchase and maintain in full force and effect any and all insurances
required under this Contract or whose insurances are inadequate with regard to Good
Industry Practice, the Authority may purchase and maintain such insurance and all
reasonable amounts being incurred by the Authority shall be reimbursed by the Contractor or
deducted from the performance guarantee provided under the Regulations.
8.3 The obligation under this Contract to maintain appropriate insurance policies shall be
deemed a fundamental term of this Contract.
8.4 The Contractor shall not materially modify or terminate any insurance policy without
the prior consent of the Authority, whose consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
8.5 The Contractor shall in its annual report provide the Authority with evidence of the
existence of such insurance including the amount of any deductibles and self-insurance
together with the details and amount of any claims made or amounts recovered from insurers
during the period.
Section 9
Other permits and notifications
9.1 The Contractor shall during the term of this Contract maintain the currency of any
applicable permits, licences, approvals, certificates and clearances not issued by the
Authority but required lawfully and safely to conduct Exploitation Activities in the Area.
9.2 The Contractor shall ensure that it provides any and all notifications required by
applicable international organizations and other agencies and bodies to conduct Exploitation
Activities in the Area in accordance with their requirements.
9.3 The Contractor shall notify the Authority promptly where any permits, licences,
approvals, certificates and clearances connected with activities in the Area are withdrawn or
suspended.
63

[Page 64]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Section 10
Development obligations
10.1 The Contractor shall, on the entry into force of this Contract,32 use all commercially
reasonable methods to incur the capital expenditures and to commence, continue and
complete construction of vessels, equipment and Installations in accordance with the Mining
Plan, together with the conduct of the necessary Production Tests, including capacity tests,
agreed to and in the period of time stipulated in the Mining Plan.
10.2 The Contractor shall, where required by the Authority, provide a quarterly report
setting out the progress of the development obligations including capital expenditures made
against the Expenditure Conditions in the Mining Plan.
10.3 The Contractor shall where required in this Contract, provide to the Authority a
certificate signed by a senior official prior to the commencement of Commercial Production,
stating that the Contractor has complied in all material respects with the development
obligations including the Expenditure Conditions specified in the Mining Plan.
Section 11
Commercial Production
11.1 The Contractor shall, once Commercial Production is achieved, maintain Commercial
Production throughout the duration of this Contract and in accordance with the Mining Plan,
to the best of the Contractor’s ability.
11.2 During Commercial Production the Contractor must use all commercially reasonable
efforts to optimize recovery of the Minerals and to produce and market Minerals removed
from the Mining Area at the recovery rates contemplated by the Mining Plan.
Section 12
Production rate
12.1 The Contractor shall notify promptly the Authority if the production rate falls below the
production parameters reflected in the Mining Plan.
12.2 Where the Authority receives such notification or otherwise becomes aware of any
failure by the Contractor to recover the Resource at the approved production rate, the
Authority, following consultation with the Contractor, may require the Contractor to deliver a
plan of corrective measures to improve its production rate in accordance with Good Industry
Practice.
12.3 Where the Authority and Contractor are unable to agree a plan of corrective
measures, the Authority shall commission a technical study by an Appropriately Qualified
Expert to assess a fair production rate taking account of the production rate in the approved
Mining Plan, the technical and economic constraints at the time and the prevailing market
conditions, as reasonably foreseeable.
12.4 The Contractor shall be afforded the opportunity to make representations to the
Authority on the findings of the Appropriately Qualified Expert before any notice to take
corrective measures is issued by the Authority.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
32 Article 17(2)(c), Annex III to the Convention does stipulate: “The Authority shall establish a maximum
time interval, after the exploration stage is completed and the exploitation stage begins, to achieve
commercial production.
64

[Page 65]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
12.5 Following the receipt of any notice under paragraph 12.4, should the Contractor
continue to fail within a reasonable period to achieve an independently assessed and fair
production rate, the Authority may take such steps as provided under these Regulations to
revise the terms of this Contract in accordance with the Regulations or to suspend or
terminate this Contract in accordance with section 31 hereof, as the case may be, subject to
the Contractor’s right to the judicial remedies available under the Convention and the
Regulations.
Section 13
Temporary suspension in production
13.1 The Council may at the request of the Contractor, and upon receipt of the
recommendations of the [Commission], authorise a temporary reduction in the production
rate33 or in the temporary suspension of the scheduled production specified in the Mining
Plan due to prevailing economic conditions or other circumstances beyond the reasonable
control of the Contractor. The duration of any authorized temporary reduction or suspension
shall be a reasonable period not exceeding [1] year and subject to review at any time.
13.2 The Contractor shall remain responsible for performing all environmental
management obligations during any temporary suspension in accordance with the
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan, Closure Plan and Environmental
Regulations.
13.3 Nothing in this regulation shall restrict the Contractor from making a temporary
reduction in the production rate or a temporary suspension of Exploitation Activities where
such reduction or suspension is in response to an Incident and for the protection of the
Marine Environment or of human health and safety.
Section 14
Avoidance of unnecessary waste in respect of the Resources of the Area
14.1 A Contractor shall avoid unnecessary waste of the Resources of the Area in
accordance with Article 150(b) of the Convention, and [the approved waste management
plan contained in the Mining Plan of the Contractor].
14.2 A Contractor shall ensure that the processing, treatment and refining of ore, whether
by the Contractor or a third party, shall optimise the recovery of the metals, subject to any
reasonable economic and technical constraints and in accordance with Good Industry
Practice.
14.3 The Authority may request from a Contractor such data, information and reports it
considers necessary in its reasonable opinion to satisfy itself there is an optimum recovery of
the metals under this Contract.
14.4 Members of the Authority shall, to the best of their abilities, assist the Authority with
the provision of data or information in connection with this regulation where such processing,
treatment and refining of ore occurs under their jurisdiction and control.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
33 Parameters / thresholds will need to be established for this. Under regulation 17 a Contractor will be
permitted to make operational changes which are “minor” in nature.
65

[Page 66]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
[Section XX
Environmental management, monitoring and reporting
[In addition to an undertaking to deliver the Environmental plans under section 2,
following the development of the Environmental Regulations, specific contractual
terms need to be inserted reflecting standard environmental obligations].
Section 15
Use of sub-Contractors and third parties.
15.1 No Contractor may sub-contract any part of its obligations under this Contract unless
the sub-contract contains appropriate terms and conditions to ensure that the performance of
the sub-contract will reflect and uphold the same standards and requirements of this Contract
between the Contractor and the Authority, as is relevant.
15.2 The Contractor shall ensure the adequacy of its systems and procedures for the
supervision and management of its sub-Contractors and third parties in accordance with
Good Industry Practice.
15.3 Nothing in this section shall exempt the Contractor from any and all obligations under
this Contract and the Contractor shall be remain responsible and liable to the Authority for the
performance of its obligations under this Contract in the event that it sub-contracts any
aspect of the performance of those obligations to a third party.
Section 16
Safety, labour and health standards
16.1 The Contractor shall ensure at all material times that:
(a) All vessels, Installations, structures, equipment and other devices operating
and engaged in Exploitation Activities are in good repair, in a safe and sound condition and
adequately manned; and
(b) That all ships operating and engaged in Exploitation Activities shall have a
class designation and shall remain in that class for the duration of this Contract
16.2 The Contractor shall ensure compliance with the generally accepted international
rules and standards established by competent international organizations or general
diplomatic conferences concerning the safety of life at sea, and the prevention of collisions
and any such relevant rules, regulations and procedures as may be adopted by the Authority
from time to time relating to safety at sea.
16.3 Specifically, Contractors shall:
(a) Only use vessels flagged to a registry of a State that has signed and
implemented into national law the [key IMO Conventions: to list];
(b) Comply with the relevant national laws relating to vessels standards and
crew safety of their flag-State, in the case of ships or their sponsoring State in the case of
Installations; and
(c) Comply with the national laws of its sponsoring State in relation to any
matters that fall outside of flag-State jurisdiction, such as worker rights for non-crew
members, and human health and safety that pertains to the mining process rather than the
ship operation.
66

[Page 67]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
16.4 The Contractor shall provide copies of valid certificates required under relevant
international shipping conventions to the Authority upon request.
Section 17
Training Plan
17.1 The Contractor shall conduct and carry out the training of personnel of the Authority
and developing States in accordance with the approved Training Plan commitment at
schedule 8 to this Contract, these Regulations and any training guidelines issued by the
Authority.
17.2 The Contractor, the Authority and sponsoring State or States may from time to time
as necessary!revise and develop the Training Plan by mutual agreement taking into account
the shortage of any skills and requirements of the industry in the undertaking of activities in
the Area and the training guidelines issued by the Authority.
17.3 Any mutually agreed modification of or amendment to the Training Plan shall become
part of schedule 8 to this Contract.
Section 18
Training of personnel
The Contractor must train its employees and other personnel engaged in Exploitation
Activities under this Contract as is necessary to ensure adequate knowledge of and
adherence to the requirements of the Rules of the Authority.
Section 19
Annual reporting requirements
19.1 The Contractor shall within 90 Days of the end of each calendar year submit an
annual report to the Secretary-General, in such format as may be prescribed from time to
time by the Commission, covering its activities in the Contract Area and reporting on
compliance with the terms and conditions of this Contract and Plan of Work.
19.2 In particular an annual report must contain detailed information on:
(a) The Exploitation work carried out during the calendar year, including maps,
charts and graphs illustrating the work that has been done and the results obtained, reported
against the approved plan of work and agreed performance criteria and indicators;
(b) The quantity and quality of the Resources recovered during the period and
the volume of Minerals and metals produced, marketed and sold during the calendar year,
reported against the Mining Plan;
(c) The equipment used to carry out the Exploitation work and in operation at the
end of the period;
(d) The results of any new Exploration activities in the Contract Area, including
updated data and information of the grade and quality of resources and reserves identified in
accordance with the Reporting standard of the International Seabed Authority for mineral
exploration results assessments, mineral resources and mineral reserves;
(e) An annual financial report in conformity with IFRS and certified by a duly
qualified firm of public accountants, of the actual and direct Exploitation expenditures, being
capital expenditures and operating costs of the Contractor in carrying out the programme of
67

[Page 68]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
activities during the Contractor’s accounting year in respect of the Contract Area together
with an annual statement of the computation of payments paid or payable to the Authority,
reported against the Financing Plan;
(f) Training carried out, reported against the training programme contained in
the plan of work;
(g) The actual results obtained from environmental monitoring programmes,
including observations, measurements, evaluations and analysis of environmental
parameters reported against, where applicable, any environmental criteria, thresholds and
indicators agreed as part of the approval of the Environmental Plans under the Environmental
Regulations; the actual costs of such compliance with the Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan and results of the independent environmental audit;
(h) A statement by a senior official of the Contractor that all Risk Management
systems and procedures have been followed and remain in place, together with an
exceptions report and the results of any verification and audit undertaken internally or by
Appropriately Qualified Experts;
(i) A health and safety report including details of any accidents or Incidents
arising during the period and actions taken against the Contractor’s health and safety
procedures;
(j) The details of the security measures taken by the Contractor in maintaining
the law, order and security of the Exploitation Activities;
(k) Details of any changes made in connection with sub-Contractors or other
third parties;
(l) The results of any social contributions or investments made together with
details of any indications of significant social impacts arising during the period and the
Contractor’s response thereto;
(m) An updated Closure Plan, where applicable.
(n) A statement by a senior official that the Contractor’s Financing Plan is
adequate for the following period;
(o) Evidence that appropriate insurance is maintained, including the amount of
any deductibles and self-insurance, together with the details and amount of any claims made
or amounts recovered from insurers during the period;
(p) Details of any proposed and reasonably foreseeable adjustments to the
activities for the following calendar year and the reasons for such adjustments together with
an operational report for the following calendar year. [Need to consider this in the light of any
material changes and the need for approval / modification of the Plan of Work / Contract].
19.3 The Contractor shall also submit such additional information to supplement the
reports referred to in this regulation as the Secretary-General may from time to time
reasonably require for the performance of the Authority’s functions.
Section 20
Human remains and objects and sites of an archaeological or historical nature
The Contractor shall immediately notify the Secretary-General in writing of any finding in the
Contract Area of any human remains of an archaeological or historical nature, or any object
or site of a similar nature and its location, including the preservation and protection measures
taken. The Secretary-General shall transmit such information to the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and any other competent
68

[Page 69]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
international organization. Following the finding of any such human remains, object or site in
the Contract Area, and in order to avoid disturbing such human remains, object or site, no
further exploration or exploitation shall take place, within a reasonable radius, until such time
as the Council decides otherwise after taking account of the views of the Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization or any other competent
international organization.
Section 21
Responsibility and liability
21.1 Responsibility and liability of the sponsoring State, the Contractor and the Authority in
relation to Exploitation of the Area is in accordance with the Convention.
21.2 The Contractor shall be liable for the actual amount of any damage, including
damage to the Marine Environment, arising out of its wrongful acts or omissions, and those of
its employees, subcontractors, agents and all persons engaged in working or acting for them
in the conduct of its operations under this Contract, including the costs of reasonable
measures to prevent or limit damage to the Marine Environment, account being taken of any
contributory acts or omissions by the Authority or third parties.
21.3 A Contractor has liability for any damage arising out of wrongful acts in the conduct
of its operations, including in relation to damage that arises after the completion of the
Exploitation Activities or Contract term.
21.4 The Contractor shall indemnify the Authority, its employees, subcontractors and
agents against all claims and liabilities of any third party arising out of any wrongful acts or
omissions of the Contractor and its employees, agents and subcontractors, and all persons
engaged in working or acting for them in the conduct of its operations under this Contract.
21.5 The Authority shall be liable for the actual amount of any damage caused to the
Contractor arising out of its wrongful acts in the exercise of its powers and functions,
including violations under article 168 (2) of the Convention, account being taken of
contributory acts or omissions by the Contractor, its employees, agents and subcontractors,
and all persons engaged in working or acting for them in the conduct of its operations under
this Contract, or third parties.
21.6 The Authority shall indemnify the Contractor, its employees, subcontractors, agents
and all persons engaged in working or acting for them in the conduct of its operations under
this Contract, against all claims and liabilities of any third party arising out of any wrongful
acts or omissions in the exercise of its powers and functions hereunder, including violations
under article 168 (2) of the Convention.
Section 22
Books, records and samples
22.1 A Contractor must keep a complete and proper set of books, accounts and financial
records, consistent with IFRS, which must include information that fully discloses actual and
direct expenditures for Exploitation, including capital expenditures and operating costs and
such other information as will facilitate an effective audit of the Contractor’s expenditures and
costs.
22.2 A Contractor must maintain such maps, geological, mining and mineral analysis
reports, production records, processing records, records of sales or use of Minerals,
69

[Page 70]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
environmental data, archives and samples and any other data, information and samples
connected with the Exploitation Activities in accordance with the Authority’s data and
information management policy.
22.3 A Contractor shall keep, in good condition, a representative portion of samples and
cores of the resource category obtained in the course of Exploitation until the termination of
this Contract.
22.4 The Authority may request the Contractor in writing to deliver to it for analysis a
portion of any such sample and cores obtained during the course of Exploitation.
22.5 A Contractor shall permit full access by the Authority to the data, information and
samples at any time and by the Authority’s Duly Appointed Representative(s).
Section 23
Notice of violation
The Contractor shall notify the Authority in writing of any violation by the Contractor of an
obligation under this Contract, within 2 Days of becoming aware of the violation.
Section 24
Response to Incidents
24.1 The Contractor shall, upon becoming aware of an Incident:
(a) Notify the Authority immediately;
(b) Immediately implement, where applicable, the Emergency Response and
Contingency Plan approved by the Authority for responding to the Incident;
(c) Respond promptly to any instructions received from the Authority; and
(d) Take any other measures necessary in the circumstances to limit the
adverse effects of the Incident.
24.2 The Authority shall report any Contractor that fails to comply with paragraph 1 above
to its sponsoring State or flag State for consideration of institution of legal proceedings under
national law.
Section 25
Other notifiable events
[Need to reflect here in due course other notifiable events which could include for
example, if Commercial Production falls below average targets, casualties, the
achievement of milestones, expected changes to / in the Financing Plan / financial
capability].
Section 26
False and misleading statements
Any Contractor who, in purported compliance with a requirement under this Contract,
knowingly or recklessly provides the Authority with information that is false or misleading in a
material particular, shall receive a warning from the Authority for the purpose of Annex III,
Article 18 of the Convention, and may be liable to a monetary penalty under that Article and
the Regulations.
70

[Page 71]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Section 27
Prevention of Corruption
27.1 The Contractor shall not make any gift or reward to any officials, agents or
employees of the Authority, including the Authority’s Duly Authorized Representatives, to
induce or reward such persons for any acts undertaken in accordance with their duties under
these Regulations.
27.2 The Contractor acknowledges and agrees that it is subject to the anti-bribery and
anti-corruption provisions of Applicable Law and of the jurisdictions in which the Contractor is
a national or by whose nationals it is effectively controlled or of the jurisdiction in which the
Contractor is organized or conducts business, and shall conduct its activities under this
Contract in accordance with its obligations under such anti-bribery and anti-corruption laws.
Section 28
Force majeure
28.1 The Contractor shall not be liable for an unavoidable delay or failure to perform [any
of its obligations / the Exploitation Activities] under this Contract due to force majeure,
provided the Contractor has taken all reasonable steps to overcome the delay or obstacle to
performance. For the purposes of this regulation, force majeure shall mean an event or
condition that the Contractor could not reasonably be expected to prevent or control;
provided that the event or condition was not caused by Contractor action, negligence or by a
failure to observe Good Industry Practice.
28.2 The Contractor shall give written notice to the Authority of the occurrence of an event
of force majeure as soon as reasonably possible after its occurrence (specifying the nature of
the event or circumstance, what is required to remedy the event or circumstance and if a
remedy is possible, the estimated time to cure or overcome the event or circumstance, and
the obligations that cannot be properly or timely performed on account of the event or
circumstance) and similarly give notice to the Authority of the restoration of normal
conditions.
28.3 The Contractor shall, upon request to the Secretary-General, be granted a time
extension equal to the period by which performance was delayed hereunder by force majeure
and the term of this Contract shall be extended accordingly.
Section 29
Renunciation of rights
The Contractor, by prior written notice to the Authority, shall have the right at any time to
renounce without penalty the whole or part of its rights in the Contract Area, provided that the
Contractor shall remain liable for all obligations and liabilities accrued prior to the date of
such renunciation in respect of the whole or part of the Contract Area renounced. Such
obligations shall include, inter alia, the payment of any sums outstanding to the Authority,
obligations under the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan in
accordance with the Environmental Regulations, and any terms and conditions of this
Contract.
71

[Page 72]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Section 30
Termination of sponsorship
30.1 If the nationality or control of the Contractor changes or the Contractor’s sponsoring
State, as defined in the Regulations, terminates its sponsorship, the Contractor shall promptly
notify the Authority forthwith.
30.2 In either such event, if the Contractor does not obtain another sponsor meeting the
requirements prescribed in the Regulations which submits to the Authority a certificate of
sponsorship for the Contractor in the prescribed form within the time specified in the
Regulations, this Contract shall terminate forthwith.
Section 31
Suspension and termination of Contract and penalties
31.1 The Council may suspend or terminate this Contract, without prejudice to any other
rights that the Authority may have, if any of the following events should occur:
(a) If, in spite of written warnings by the Authority, the Contractor has conducted
its activities in such a way as to result in serious persistent and wilful violations of the
fundamental terms of this Contract, Part XI of the Convention, the Agreement and the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority;
(b) If the Contractor has failed to comply with a final binding decision of the
dispute settlement body applicable to it;
(c) If the Contractor [or any person standing as surety or financial guarantor to
the Contractor] becomes insolvent or commits an act of bankruptcy or enters into any
agreement for composition with its creditors or goes into liquidation or receivership, whether
compulsory or voluntary, or petitions or applies to any tribunal for the appointment of a
receiver or a trustee or receiver for itself or commences any proceedings relating to itself
under any bankruptcy, insolvency or readjustment of debt law, whether now or hereafter in
effect, other than for the purpose of reconstruction;
(d) If a Contractor is not recovering Minerals in commercial quantities at the end
of [5 / 10] years from the expected date of Commercial Production, save where the
Contractor is able to demonstrate to the Council’s satisfaction good cause, which may
include force majeure, adverse economic conditions, unavoidable delays in construction,
major unanticipated vessel repairs and environmental factors, or other circumstances beyond
the reasonable control of the Contractor that prevented the Contractor from achieving
Commercial Production.
31.2 The Council may, without prejudice to section 28, after consultation with the
Contractor, suspend or terminate this Contract, without prejudice to any other rights that the
Authority may have, if the Contractor is prevented from performing its obligations under this
Contract by reason of an event or condition of force majeure, as described in section 28,
which has persisted for a continuous period exceeding two years, despite the Contractor
having taken all reasonable measures to overcome its inability to perform and comply with
the terms and conditions of this Contract with minimum delay.
31.3 Any suspension or termination shall be by notice, through the Secretary-General,
which shall include a statement of the reasons for taking such action. The suspension or
termination shall be effective 60 Days after such notice, unless the Contractor within such
period disputes the Authority’s right to suspend or terminate this Contract in accordance with
72

[Page 73]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Part XI, section 5, of the Convention, in which case this Contract shall only be suspended or
terminated in accordance with a final binding decision in accordance with Part XI, section 5,
of the Convention.
31.4 If the Contractor takes such action, this Contract shall only be suspended or
terminated in accordance with a final binding decision in accordance with Part XI, section 5,
of the Convention.
31.5 If the Council has suspended this Contract, the Council may by notice require the
Contractor to resume its operations and comply with the terms and conditions of this
Contract, not later than 60 Days after such notice.
31.6 In the case of any violation of this Contract not covered by section 31.1(a), or in lieu
of suspension or termination under section 30.1, the Council may impose upon the
Contractor monetary penalties proportionate to the seriousness of the violation and in
accordance with the Regulations.
Section 32
Obligations on Suspension or following Expiration, Surrender or Termination of a
Contract
32.1 In the event of termination, expiration or surrender of this Contract, the Contractor
shall:
(a) Comply with the Closure Plan, continue to perform the required
environmental management of the Contract Area as set forth in the Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan and the final Closure Plan and for the period agreed in the
Closure Plan.
(b) Continue to comply with relevant provisions of these Regulations, including:
(i) Maintain and keep in place all insurance required under these
Regulations;
(ii) Pay any fee, royalty, penalty or other money on any other account
owing to the Authority on or before the date of suspension or
termination; and
(iii) [other].
(c) Remove all Installations, plant, equipment and materials in the Contract
Area; and
(d) Make the area safe so as not to constitute a danger to persons, shipping or
to the Marine Environment to the reasonable satisfaction of the Authority.
32.2 Where the Contractor fails to undertake the obligations listed in section 32.1 within a
reasonable period, the Authority may take necessary steps to effect such removal and make
safe the area, at the expense of the Contractor. Such expense, if any, shall be deducted from
the Financial Guarantee and Security held by the Authority.
32.3 The Contractor shall retain legal title to the Minerals recovered from the Contract
Area before the effective termination date. Legal title to all Resources in situ in the Contract
Area at the date of termination shall remain vested in the Authority.
73

[Page 74]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Section 33
Transfer of rights and obligations
33.1 The rights and obligations of the Contractor under this Contract may be transferred in
whole or in part only with the consent of the Authority and in accordance with the
Regulations.
33.2 The Authority shall not unreasonably withhold consent to the transfer if the proposed
transferee is in all respects a qualified applicant in accordance with the Regulations and
assumes all of the obligations of the Contractor and if the transfer does not confer to the
transferee a plan of work, the approval of which would be forbidden by article 6, paragraph 3
(c), of Annex III to the Convention.
33.3 The terms, undertakings and conditions of this Contract shall inure to the benefit of
and be binding upon the parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns.
Section 34
Change of control
34.1 Where there is a change of control of the Contractor, or there is a change of control
in any entity providing a Financial Guarantee or Security on behalf of a Contractor, the
Contractor shall notify the Authority within 90 Days of such change of control together with
details of the change of control.
34.2 The Authority may treat a change of control as a transfer of rights and obligations in
accordance with the requirements of the Regulations.
34.3 Where the Authority is not satisfied that, following a change of control, the Contractor
will continue to be able to meet its obligations under this Contract, the Authority may seek to:
(a) Modify this Contract in accordance with the Regulations; or
(b) Suspend or terminate this Contract in accordance with the section 31.
Section 35
Other resource categories
35.1 The Contractor shall notify the Authority if it finds Resources in the Area other than
the resource category to which this Contract relates, within 30 Days of its find.
35.2 The prospecting, exploration for and exploitation of such finds must be the subject of
a separate application to the Authority in accordance with the Rules of the Authority.
Section 36
Confidentiality
Information transferred to the Authority in accordance with this Contract shall be treated as
Confidential Information in accordance with the provisions of the Regulations.
Section 37
Disclaimer
Neither the Contractor nor any affiliated company or subcontractor shall in any manner claim
or suggest, whether expressly or by implication, that the Authority or any official thereof has,
or has expressed, any opinion with respect to the Mineral resource in the Contract Area and
74

[Page 75]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
a statement to that effect shall not be included in or endorsed on any prospectus, notice,
circular, advertisement, press release or similar document issued by the Contractor, any
affiliated company or any subcontractor that refers directly or indirectly to this contract. For the
purposes of this section, an “affiliated company” means any person, firm or company or
State-owned entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the Contractor.
Section 38
No waiver
No waiver by either party of any rights pursuant to a breach of the terms and conditions of
this Contract to be performed by the other party shall be construed as a waiver by the party
of any succeeding breach of the same or any other term or condition to be performed by the
other party.
Section 39
Modification of terms and conditions of this Contract
39.1 When circumstances have arisen or are likely to arise after this Contract has
commenced, which in the opinion of the Authority or the Contractor, would render this
Contract inequitable or make it impracticable or impossible to achieve the objectives set out
in this Contract or in Part XI of the Convention, the parties shall enter into negotiations to
revise it accordingly.
39.2 This Contract may also be revised by agreement between the Contractor and the
Authority, including where revision is necessary or desirable to reflect any rules, regulations
and procedures adopted by the Authority subsequent to the entry into force of this Contract.
39.3 This Contract may be revised only:
(a) With the consent of the Contractor and the Authority, and
(b) By an appropriate instrument signed by the duly authorized representatives
of the parties.
39.4 Subject to the confidentiality requirements of the Regulations, the Authority shall
publish information about any revision to the terms and conditions of this Contract.
Section 40
National law
Nothing in this Contract shall relieve a Contractor from its lawful obligations under any
national law to which it is subject by reason of effective control, incorporation or otherwise
including the laws of a sponsoring State, flag State, or host country.
Section 41
Applicable law
41.1 This Contract shall be governed by the terms of this Contract, the rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority, Part XI of the Convention, the Agreement and other rules of
international law not incompatible with the Convention.
41.2 The Contractor, its employees, subcontractors, agents and all persons engaged in
working or acting for them in the conduct of its operations under this Contract shall observe
the applicable law referred to in section 41.1 hereof and shall not engage in any transaction,
directly or indirectly, prohibited by the applicable law.
75

[Page 76]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
35.3 Nothing contained in this Contract shall be deemed an exemption from the necessity
of applying for and obtaining any permit or authority that may be required for any activities
under this Contract.
Section 42
Interpretation
The division of this Contract into sections and subsections and the insertion of headings are
for convenience of reference only and shall not affect the construction or interpretation
hereof.
Section 43
Disputes
Any dispute between the parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Contract
shall be settled in accordance with Part X of the Regulations.
76

[Page 77]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annex VIII
Schedule of Contract violations and monetary penalties
[To be drafted].
77

[Page 78]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Annex IX
Schedule of other applicable fees
Applicable fee Prescribed amount (US$)
Application fee for the renewal of an [ ]
Exploitation Contract
Application fee for the transfer of an interest [ ]
in a contract or approved plan of work
Application fee for the use of a contract or [ ]
approved plan of work as security
Application fee for a temporary suspension in [ ]
Commercial Production
Application fee in respect of a material [ ]
change to a Plan of Work
[Other]
78

[Page 79]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
Schedule 1
Use of terms and scope – Definitions
“Affiliate” means an entity that, directly or indirectly, through one or more intermediaries,
controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with the Contractor. For purposes of
this definition, “control” means ownership of greater than 50% of the share capital of a
company and/or the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the
direction of the management or policies of an entity, whether through the ability to exercise
voting power, by Contract or otherwise.
“Annual Contract Administration Fee” means an amount payable to the Authority under a
Contract in accordance with regulation 21.
“Annual Fixed Fee” means an amount payable to the Authority under a Contract in
accordance with regulation 22.
“Applicant” means any entity under regulation 2 applying for the approval of a Plan of Work.
“Application” means an application for approval for a Plan of Work, made in accordance with
these Regulations.
“Appropriately Qualified Expert(s) ”means an individual or firm with demonstrable
expertise of Good Industry Practice in the relevant subject matter who is not affiliated with the
Authority, an Applicant for a Plan of Work, or sponsoring State or Contractor, as the case
may be.
“Approval Date” means the date on which the Council approves a Plan of Work.
“Area” means the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction [as defined under the Convention].
“Arm’s length” means in relation to any contracts or transactions entered into in connection
with activities in the Area, contracts and transactions entered into freely by independent
parties that are not related parties.
“Arm’s length value” means in connection with any transaction, the value that a willing
buyer and will seller, who are not related parties, would agree is fair in the circumstances.
“Authority” means the International Seabed Authority established under Article 156 of the
Convention.
[“Block” means an area comprised in each Proposed Mining Area and which is delineated
on the reference map attached to the Plan of Work].34
Calendar year means a period of 12 months ending with 31 December.
“Change of Control” has the meaning given to it in regulation [ ].
“Closure Plan” means a plan required to be produced and submitted to the Authority by an
Applicant under regulation 4 as part of its Application.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
34 Whether the concept of a “block” will be adopted or is applicable to Mining Areas is for discussion. A
number of Pacific Island States have adopted this concept in their DSM legislation
79

[Page 80]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
“Commercial Production” means production where an operator engages in sustained
large-scale recovery operations which yield a quantity of materials sufficient to indicate
clearly that the principal purpose is large-scale production rather than production intended for
information gathering, analysis or the testing of equipment or plant.
“Commission” means the Legal and Technical Commission of the Authority.
“Confidential information” shall have the meaning assigned to that term by regulation 46.
“Contract Area” means the area delineated in Schedule 1 of an Exploitation Contract.
“Contractor” means an entity under regulation 2 holding an Exploitation Contract and,
where the context applies, shall include its employees, sub-contractors, agents and all
persons engaged in working or acting for them in the conduct of its operations under an
Exploitation Contract.
“Convention” means the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
“Council” means the principal organ of the Authority established under Article 158 of the
Convention.
“Day” means calendar day.
“Duly Authorized Representative” means any person duly authorized by the Secretary-
General to exercise powers or functions of the Authority under the rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority.
“Effect” includes any positive or negative effect, any temporary or permanent effect, any
past, present or future effect, any cumulative effect that arises over time or in combination
with other effects, any potential effect of high probability and any potential effect of low
probability that has a high potential impact.
[Eligible Capital Expenditure means an amount of actual capital expenditure expended by
the Contractor and directly related to the setting up and bringing the exploitation operation
into production.]35
“Emergency Response and Contingency Plan means a plan required to be produced and
submitted to the Authority by an Applicant under regulation 4 as part of its Application.
“Environmental [and Social] Impact Statement” means a statement prescribed by and
approved in accordance with the Environmental Regulations and submitted to the Authority
by an Applicant under regulation 4 as part of its Application.
“Environmental Information” means any Information relating to the protection and
preservation of the Marine Environment, in particular those from environmental assessment,
management and monitoring programmes and includes any Information on:
(a) The state of elements of the environment, such as air and atmosphere, water,
soil, land, landscape and natural sites, biological diversity and its components, and
the interaction among these elements;
(b) Factors, such as substances, energy, noise and radiation, and activities or
measures, including administrative measures, environmental agreements, policies,
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
35 This definition is presented as it could provide a trigger point for the review / revision of a payment
mechanism rather than a time-based trigger.
80

[Page 81]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
[regulations], plans and programmes, affecting or likely to affect the elements of the
environment within the scope of subparagraph (a) above, and cost-benefit and other
economic analyses and assumptions used in environmental decision-making;
(c) The state of human health and safety, conditions of human life, cultural sites and
built structures, inasmuch as they are or may be affected by the state of the elements
of the environment or, through these elements, by the factors, activities or measures
referred to in subparagraph (b) above.36
“Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan” means a plan prescribed by and
approved in accordance with the Environmental Regulations and submitted to the Authority
by an Applicant under regulation 4 as part of its Application.
“Environmental Plans” means the Environmental [and Social] Impact Statement, the
Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan approved in accordance
with the Environmental Regulations.
“Environmental Regulations” means the Regulations on Exploration and Exploitation for
Mineral Resources in the Area (Environmental Matters).
“Expenditure Conditions” means commitments specified in a Plan of Work for the
expenditure of money on or in connection with Exploitation Activities to be carried out.
“Exploitation” and “Exploitation Activities”, as applicable, means the recovery for
commercial purposes of the Resources in the Area and the extraction of minerals therefrom,
including the construction and operation of mining, processing and transportation systems,
for the production and marketing of metals and all other activities, including Exploration in the
Contract Area and other steps preparatory to Commercial Production, as well as the
decommissioning and closure of operations, necessary or expedient to carry out a
Contractor’s rights and obligations under a Contract.
“Exploration” means the searching for [deposits of] Resources in the Contract Area [with
exclusive rights], the analysis of such Resources, the use and testing of recovery systems
and equipment, processing facilities and transportation systems and the carrying out of
studies of the environmental, technical, economic, commercial and other appropriate factors
that shall be taken into account in Exploitation.
“Exploration Regulations” means the Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for
Polymetallic Nodules in the Area, the Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for
Polymetallic Sulphides in the Area and the Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for
Cobalt-Rich Ferromanganese Crusts in the Area, as the case may be and as replaced or
amended by the Council from time to time.
“Feasibility Study” means a report required to be produced and submitted to the Authority
by an Applicant under regulation 4 as part of its Application.
“Financial Guarantee or Security” means any insurance, bank guarantee, trust fund, cash,
parent company guarantee, [State guarantee] or other such instrument or combination of
instruments required by the Authority from a Contractor under these Regulations.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
36 This definition (paragraph’s (a)-(c)) has been taken directly from Article 2(3) Convention on Access to
Information, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters,
Aarhus, Denmark, 25 June 1998.
81

[Page 82]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
“Financing Plan” means a plan required to be produced and submitted to the Authority by
an Applicant under regulation 4 as part of its Application.
“Good Industry Practice” means the exercise of that degree of skill, diligence, prudence
and foresight which would reasonably and ordinarily be expected to be applied by a skilled
and experienced person engaged in the marine mining industry and includes but is not
limited to the guidance provided, as applicable, by the IFC Performance Standards, by the
International Organization for Standardization standards, the International Marine Minerals
Society, the performance requirements under these Regulations, the Recommendations
made from time to time under these Regulations by the Commission and other International
Recognized Standards, adopted, endorsed or issued by the Authority from time to time.
“IFRS” means International Financial Reporting Standards being a set of accounting
standards developed by the International Accounting Standards Board.
“Incident” means a situation where activities in the Area result in:
1. a marine Incident or a marine casualty as defined in the Code of the International
Standards and Recommended Practices for a Safety Investigation into a Marine Casualty
or Marine Incident (Casualty Investigation Code, effective 1 January 2010);
2. serious harm to the Marine Environment or to other existing legitimate sea uses, whether
accidental or not, or a situation in which such serious harm to the Marine Environment is
a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the situation;
3. [damage to a submarine cable or pipeline].
“IFC Performance Standards” means the International Finance Corporation’s Performance
Standards on Social and Environmental Sustainability.
“Information” means all information, data or knowledge supplied or transferred to the
Authority in any format whatsoever.
“Inspector” means a person appointed by the Authority as an Inspector in relation to and in
accordance with these Regulations.
“Installation” means any offshore installation, artificial structure, floating platform,
equipment or device used, or intended to be used, in or on the seabed or adjacent water
column for the purpose of the Exploitation Activities, [but excluding vessels??].
“International Recognized Standards” means a standard adopted by an international
[regional or national]37 standards organization and made available to the public.
“Marine Environment” includes the physical, chemical, geological and biological and
genetic components, conditions and factors which interact and determine the productivity,
state, condition and quality and connectivity of the marine ecosystem(s), the waters of the
seas and oceans and the airspace above those waters, as well as the seabed and ocean
floor and subsoil thereof.
“Minerals” means Resources that have been recovered from the Area.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
37 “Internationally-accepted” standards are preferred. But also need to consider regional or country
standards which maybe equivalent to, based on or have a higher level of standard.
82

[Page 83]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
“Mining Area” means that part or parts of the Contract Area allocated to a Contractor for
Exploitation, defined by the coordinates contained in the Exploitation Contract.
“Mining Plan” means a plan required to be produced and submitted to the Authority by an
Applicant under regulation 4 as part of its Application.
“Natural Resources of the Area” means the living and non-living resources of the Area.
“Plan of Work” means a Plan of Work for Exploitation in the Area being collectively all and
any plan or other document setting out the activities for the conduct of the Exploitation, which
form part of, or is proposed to be part of, an Exploitation Contract.
[Point of sale means the first auditable point at which the sale of minerals removed from the
Mining Area by a Contractor is made or occurs].38
Point of valuation means the first point at which the minerals removed from the Mining Area
are transferred to a transportation vessel for shipping from the Area.39
“Proposed Mining Area” means that area(s) in the Area and delineated in a Plan of Work
submitted by an Applicant for approval by the Authority.
“Public Notice” when given by the Authority, means any notice published digitally at
www.isa.org.jm.
“Rate of royalty” means [an ad valorem royalty in respect of a sales value or deemed sales
value of mineral ore sold or removed without sale] from the Mining Area as prescribed by the
Council in accordance with regulation [ ].
“Records” means all financial, commercial and technical books, accounts, statements,
records, documents, papers, data and information connected with and arising from the
Exploitation Activities and required under these Regulations.
“Recommendations” means the recommendations for the guidance of Contractors issued
by the Commission from time to time.
“Reporting period” means the period of time prescribed by regulation 26.
“Reserved Area” means any part of the Area designated by the Authority as a Reserved
Area in accordance with Annex III, Article 8 of the Convention.
“Resources” means all solid, liquid or gaseous mineral resources in situ in the Area at or
beneath the seabed, including, but not limited to (i) polymetallic nodules being any deposit or
accretion of nodules, on or just below the surface of the deep seabed, which contain metals
such as manganese, nickel, cobalt and copper; (ii) polymetallic sulphides being
hydrothermally formed deposits of sulphides and accompanying mineral resources in the
Area which contain concentrations of metals such as, copper, lead, zinc, gold and silver and
(iii) cobalt crusts being cobalt-rich ferromanganese hydroxide/oxide deposits formed from
direct precipitation of Minerals from seawater onto hard substrates containing concentrations
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
38 The point of sale could be relevant at a future date (in connection with the imposition of say an ad
valorem royalty based on an invoice price).
39 In view of there being no clearly identifiable auditable point of sale at this stage, a point of valuation is
key to determining the point at which the mineral ore is valued for the purposes of a royalty payable
under Part V.
83

[Page 84]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
of metals such as cobalt, titanium, nickel, platinum, molybdenum, tellurium, cerium, other
metallic and rare earth elements.
“Risk” means the combination of the probability of an event and the possible consequences
of that event.
“Risk Assessment” means the systematic assessment of Incidents and other operational
risks using internationally accepted standards of Risk Assessment as adapted for
Exploitation Activities.
“Risk Management” means the effective management of risk using internationally
recognised standards of Risk Management and associated systems, as adapted for
Exploitation Activities, to avoid, mitigate and manage Incidents and operational risks.
“Royalty” means the royalty payable to the Authority in respect of the minerals and provided
for under regulation 23.
“Royalty Return” means any interim, annual or final royalty return required under Part V of
these Regulations.
“Rules of the Authority” the Convention, the Agreement, the contract, these Regulations
and other rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority as may be adopted from time to
time.
“Safety Zone” means a zone designated in accordance with Article 147(2)(c) of the
Convention being an area within a distance of [500] metres from any mining support vessel
or Installation engaged in Exploitation Activities.
“Seabed Mining Registry” means the mineral rights and dealings online registry
established and maintained by the Authority in accordance with the [Seabed Directorate
Regulations].
“Standard Clauses” means the standard terms and conditions of an Exploitation Contract
set out in Annex VII to these Regulations being those standard terms and conditions in effect
at the date of entry into force of the Exploitation Contract.
“States Parties” means States who are party to the Convention.
84

[Page 85]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
85

[Page 86]
Working Draft Regulations and Standard Contract Terms on Exploitation for Mineral
Resources in the Area
!
86