[Page 1]
CONSOLIDATION
OF PART XI
OF THE CONVENTION
AND THE IMPLEMENTATION
AGREEMENT

[Page 3]
Unofficial Consolidation of Part XI
of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea
and the Agreement relating
to the Implementation of Part XI
of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea
of 10 December 1982

[Page 4]
Published in Jamaica 2025 by the International Seabed Authority
© International Seabed Authority 2025
Unofficial Consolidation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea and the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982.
1. International Seabed Authority
2. Maritime Law
3. Access to the sea (International Law)
All rights reserved.
ISBN assignments:
978-976-8313-60-7 (hbk)
978-976-8313-61-4 (pbk)
978-976-8313-62-1 (ebk)
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopy or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright
owner. Application for such permission with a statement of purpose and
extent of reproduction, should be addressed to:
International Seabed Authority
c/o The Communications Unit
14-20 Port Royal Street,
Kingston, Jamaica
Cover and graphic design by Anica Novak

[Page 5]
FOREWORD
On the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the establishment of the In-
ternational Seabed Authority, I am delighted to present the second edi-
tion of the Unofficial Consolidation of Part XI of the United Nations Con-
vention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the Agreement relating to
the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (the Implementation Agreement).
The entry into force of UNCLOS, our Constitution for the Oceans, on 16
November 1994, marked the establishment of the Authority. Under the
UNCLOS and the Implementation Agreement, the Authority is designated
as the organization through which States Parties to the UNCLOS organize
and control deep seabed activities in areas beyond national jurisdiction,
the “Area” thereby giving the Authority exclusive jurisdiction to manage
the Area and its mineral resources for the benefit of all humankind.
UNCLOS, now with 169 States Parties plus the European Union, enjoys
near-universal adherence – a testament to our collective commitment
to a rules-based order for the oceans. This regime, including the Part XI
common heritage framework, has ensured international cooperation and
stability for decades.
Today, the membership of the Authority is embarking on a new decade
of critical importance. A decade that must be anchored in international
law and multilateralism to deliver a regime that will regulate the mineral
resources of the deep seabed while ensuring environmental sustainability
and intergenerational equity.
The deep seabed, with all its mineral wealth, biodiversity, and scientific
wonders does not belong to one nation or one generation – it belongs to
all of us, collectively. The visionaries who crafted UNCLOS forty years ago
understood this truth, declaring the Area and its resources the common
heritage of humankind.
It is now upon us to carry that vision forward. In this spirit, I welcome
this second edition of the Unofficial Consolidation of Part XI of the Con-
vention and the Implementation Agreement, reinforcing the legal frame-
work for the Authority to deliver its mandate, including the adoption of
the Regulations on Exploitation of Mineral Resources in the Area.
Leticia Carvalho
Secretary-General of the International Seabed Authority

[Page 7]
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
This second publication of the unofficial consolidation of Part XI of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (“the Convention”) and
the Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (“the
Agreement”) has been prepared by the Office of Legal Affairs of the
International Seabed Authority. Like the first edition published in 1998, it
in no way replaces the official texts of the Convention and the Agreement
published by the United Nations (UN Publication, Sales No. E.97.V.10).
In accordance with article 2, paragraph 1, of the Agreement, the
provisions of the Agreement and Part XI shall be interpreted and applied
together as a single instrument. In the event of any inconsistency between
the Agreement and Part XI, the provisions of the Agreement shall prevail.
The text of the consolidation follows the order of Part XI of the
Convention. The relevant provisions of the Agreement are shown in bold
text. Certain provisions of the Agreement affect more than one provision
of Part XI and are therefore repeated in several places.
In a number of instances, the Agreement states that a particular provision
of Part XI “does not apply”. In such cases, so as not to interrupt the flow of
the text, the provisions of Part XI which, pursuant to the Agreement, do
not apply are omitted from the main body of the text. Those provisions
are, however, set out in full in italics at the end of the relevant article of
Part XI.
In a number of cases, provisions contained in Part XI include cross-
references to other provisions of Part XI which, pursuant to the Agreement,
no longer apply. Where this occurs, reference is made by means of a
footnote to the equivalent, or parallel, provision of the Agreement. The
reader is, however, left to make his or her own interpretation of the
applicability, or otherwise, of the equivalent, or parallel, provision in
accordance with article 2, paragraph 1, of the Agreement.
The annex to the Agreement does not follow the same order as Part XI of
the Convention. Accordingly, in consolidating the provisions of the annex
to the Agreement with the provisions of Part XI, it is not possible to set
7

[Page 8]
out the provisions of the annex to the Agreement sequentially. For ease of
reference, therefore, the entire text of the Agreement, in its original form,
is reproduced at the end of the document.
8

[Page 9]
UNOFFICIAL CONSOLIDATION OF PART XI OF THE UNITED
NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF THE SEA AND THE
AGREEMENT RELATING TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
PART XI OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE
LAW OF THE SEA
PREAMBLE
The States Parties to this Convention,
Prompted by the desire to settle, in a spirit of mutual understanding
and cooperation, all issues relating to the law of the sea and aware of
the historic significance of this Convention as an important contribution
to the maintenance of peace, justice and progress for all peoples of the
world,
Noting that developments since the United Nations Conferences on the
Law of the Sea held at Geneva in 1958 and 1960 have accentuated the
need for a new and generally acceptable Convention on the law of the
sea,
Conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and
need to be considered as a whole,
Recognizing the desirability of establishing through this Convention,
with due regard for the sovereignty of all States, a legal order for the
seas and oceans which will facilitate international communication, and
will promote the peaceful uses of the seas and oceans, the equitable
and efficient utilization of their resources, the conservation of their living
resources, and the study, protection and preservation of the marine
environment,
Bearing in mind that the achievement of these goals will contribute to
the realization of a just and equitable international economic order which
takes into account the interests and needs of mankind as a whole and,
in particular, the special interests and needs of developing countries,
whether coastal or land-locked,
9

[Page 10]
Desiring by this Convention to develop the principles embodied
in resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17 December 1970 in which the General
Assembly of the United Nations solemnly declared inter alia that the area
of the seabed and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits
of national jurisdiction, as well as its resources, are the common heritage
of mankind, the exploration and exploitation of which shall be carried out
for the benefit of mankind as a whole, irrespective of the geographical
location of States,
Believing that the codification and progressive development of the law
of the sea achieved in this Convention will contribute to the strengthening
of peace, security, cooperation and friendly relations among all nations in
conformity with the principles of justice and equal rights and will promote
the economic and social advancement of all peoples of the world, in
accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations as set
forth in the Charter,
Affirming that matters not regulated by this Convention continue to be
governed by the rules and principles of general international law,
Have agreed as follows:
10

[Page 11]
PART I - INTRODUCTION
Article 1
Use of terms and scope
1. For the purposes of this Convention:
(1) “Area” means the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof, beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction;
(2) “Authority” means the International Seabed Authority;
(3) “activities in the Area” means all activities of exploration for, and
exploitation of, the resources of the Area;
(4) “pollution of the marine environment” means the introduction by
man, directly or indirectly, of substances or energy into the marine
environment, including estuaries, which results or is likely to result in
such deleterious effects as harm to living resources and marine life,
hazards to human health, hindrance to marine activities, including
fishing and other legitimate uses of the sea, impairment of quality for
use of sea water and reduction of amenities;
(5) (a) “dumping means:
(i) any deliberate disposal of wastes or other matter from
vessels, aircraft, platforms or other man-made structures
at sea;
(ii) any deliberate disposal of vessels, aircraft, platforms or
other man-made structures at sea;
(b) “dumping” does not include:
(i) the disposal of wastes or other matter incidental to, or
derived from the normal operations of vessels, aircraft,
platforms or other man-made structures at sea and
their equipment, other than wastes or other matter
transported by or to vessels, aircraft, platforms or other
man-made structures at sea , operating for the purpose
of disposal of such matter or derived from the treatment
of such wastes or other matter on such vessels, aircraft,
platforms structures;
(ii) placement of matter for a purpose other than the mere
disposal thereof, provided that such placement is not
contrary to the aims of this Convention.
2. (1) “States Parties” means States which have consented to be bound
by this Convention and for which this Convention is in force.
11

[Page 12]
(2) This Convention applies mutatis mutandis to the entities referred to in
article 305, paragraph 1 (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f), which become Parties
to this
Convention in accordance with the conditions relevant to each, and to
that extent “States Parties” refers to those entities.
…
12

[Page 13]
PART XI - THE AREA
SECTION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 133
Use of terms
For the purposes of this Part:
(a) “resources” means all solid, liquid or gaseous mineral resources in
situ in the Area at or beneath the seabed, including polymetallic
nodules;
(b) resources, when recovered from the Area, are referred to as
“minerals”.
Article 134
Scope of this Part
1. This Part applies to the Area.
2. Activities in the Area shall be governed by the provisions of this Part.
3. The requirements concerning deposit of, and publicity to be given
to, the charts or lists of geographical coordinates showing the limits
referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (1), are set forth in Part VI.
4. Nothing in this article affects the establishment of the outer limits
of the continental shelf in accordance with Part VI or the validity of
agreements relating to delimitation between States with opposite or
adjacent coasts.
Article 135
Legal status of the superjacent waters and air space
Neither this Part nor any rights granted or exercised pursuant thereto
shall affect the legal status of the waters superjacent to the Area or that of
the air space above those waters.
SECTION 2. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE AREA
Article 136
Common heritage of mankind
The Area and its resources are the common heritage of mankind.
13

[Page 14]
Article 137
Legal status of the Area and its resources
1. No State shall claim or exercise sovereignty or sovereign rights over
any part of the Area or its resources, nor shall any State or natural
or juridical person appropriate any part thereof. No such claim or
exercise of sovereignty or sovereign rights nor such appropriation
shall be recognized.
2. All rights in the resources of the Area are vested in mankind as a
whole, on whose behalf the Authority shall act. These resources are
not subject to alienation. The minerals recovered from the Area,
however, may only be alienated in accordance with this Part and the
rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority.
3. No State or natural or juridical person shall claim, acquire or exercise
rights with respect to the minerals recovered from the Area except in
accordance with this Part. Otherwise, no such claim, acquisition or
exercise of such rights shall be recognized.
Article 138
General conduct of States in relation to the Area
The general conduct of States in relation to the Area shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this Part, the principles embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations and other rules of international law in the
interests of maintaining peace and security and promoting international
cooperation and mutual understanding.
Article 139
Responsibility to ensure compliance and liability for damage
1. States Parties shall have the responsibility to ensure that activities in
the Area, whether carried out by States Parties, or state enterprises
or natural or juridical persons which possess the nationality of States
Parties or are effectively controlled by them or their nationals, shall
be carried out in conformity with this Part. The same responsibility
applies to international organizations for activities in the Area carried
out by such organizations.
2. Without prejudice to the rules of international law and Annex
III, article 22, damage caused by the failure of a State Party or
international organization to carry out its responsibilities under this
Part shall entail liability; States Parties or international organizations
acting together shall bear joint and several liability. A State Party
14

[Page 15]
shall not however be liable for damage caused by any failure to
comply with this Part by a person whom it has sponsored under
article 153, paragraph 2(b), if the State Party has taken all necessary
and appropriate measures to secure effective compliance under
article 153, paragraph 4, and Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4.
3. States Parties that are members of international organizations shall
take appropriate measures to ensure the implementation of this
article with respect to such organizations.
Article 140
Benefit of mankind
1. Activities in the Area shall, as specifically provided for in this Part,
be carried out for the benefit of mankind as a whole, irrespective
of the geographical location of States, whether coastal or land-
locked, and taking into particular consideration the interests and
needs of developing States and of peoples who have not attained
full independence or other self-governing status recognized by the
United Nations in accordance with General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and other relevant General Assembly resolutions.
2. The Authority shall provide for the equitable sharing of financial and
other economic benefits derived from activities in the Area through
any appropriate mechanism, on a non-discriminatory basis, in
accordance with article 160, paragraph 2(f)(i).
Article 141
Use of the Area exclusively for peaceful purposes
The Area shall be open to use exclusively for peaceful purposes by
all States, whether coastal or land-locked, without discrimination and
without prejudice to the other provisions of this Part.
Article 142
Rights and legitimate interests of coastal States
1. Activities in the Area, with respect to resource deposits in the Area
which lie across limits of national jurisdiction, shall be conducted
with due regard to the rights and legitimate interests of any coastal
State across whose jurisdiction such deposits lie.
2. Consultations, including a system of prior notification, shall be
maintained with the State concerned, with a view to avoiding
infringement of such rights and interests. In cases where activities
15

[Page 16]
in the Area may result in the exploitation of resources lying within
national jurisdiction, the prior consent of the coastal State concerned
shall be required.
3. Neither this Part nor any rights granted or exercised pursuant
thereto shall affect the rights of coastal States to take such measures
consistent with the relevant provisions of Part XII as may be necessary
to prevent, mitigate or eliminate grave and imminent danger to their
coastline, or related interests from pollution or threat thereof or
from other hazardous occurrences resulting from or caused by any
activities in the Area.
Article 143
Marine scientific research
1. Marine scientific research in the Area shall be carried out exclusively
for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of mankind as a whole, in
accordance with Part XIII.
2. The Authority may carry out marine scientific research concerning
the Area and its resources, and may enter into contracts for that
purpose. The Authority shall promote and encourage the conduct
of marine scientific research in the Area, and shall coordinate and
disseminate the results of such research and analysis when available.
3. States Parties may carry out marine scientific research in the Area.
States Parties shall promote international cooperation in marine
scientific research in the Area by:
(a) participating in international programmes and encouraging
cooperation in marine scientific research by personnel of
different countries and of the Authority;
(b) ensuring that programmes are developed through the
Authority or other international organizations as appropriate
for the benefit of developing States and technologically less
developed States with a view to:
(i) strengthening their research capabilities;
(ii) training their personnel and the personnel of the
Authority in the techniques and applications of research;
(iii) fostering the employment of their qualified personnel in
research in the Area;
(c) effectively disseminating the results of research and analysis
when available, through the Authority or other international
channels when appropriate.
16

[Page 17]
Article 144
Transfer of technology
1. The Authority shall take measures in accordance with this Convention:
(a) to acquire technology and scientific knowledge relating to
activities in the Area; and
(b) to promote and encourage the transfer to developing States
of such technology and scientific knowledge so that all States
Parties benefit therefrom.
2. To this end the Authority and States Parties shall cooperate in
promoting the transfer of technology and scientific knowledge
relating to activities in the Area so that the Enterprise and all States
Parties may benefit therefrom. In particular they shall initiate and
promote:
(a) programmes for the transfer of technology to the Enterprise
and to developing States with regard to activities in the Area,
including, inter alia, facilitating the access of the Enterprise and
of developing States to the relevant technology, under fair and
reasonable terms and conditions;
(b) measures directed towards the advancement of the technology
of the Enterprise and the domestic technology of developing
States, particularly by providing opportunities to personnel
from the Enterprise and from developing States for training in
marine science and technology and for their full participation in
activities in the Area.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 5
SECTION 5. TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY
1. In addition to the provisions of article 144 of the Convention,
transfer of technology for the purposes of Part XI shall be
governed by the following principles:
(a) The Enterprise, and developing States wishing to
obtain deep seabed mining technology, shall seek
to obtain such technology on fair and reasonable
commercial terms and conditions on the open market,
or through joint-venture arrangements;
(b) If the Enterprise or developing States are unable to
obtain deep seabed mining technology, the Authority
may request all or any of the contractors and their
respective sponsoring State or States to cooperate with
17

[Page 18]
it in facilitating the acquisition of deep seabed mining
technology by the Enterprise or its joint venture, or
by a developing State or States seeking to acquire
such technology on fair and reasonable commercial
terms and conditions, consistent with the effective
protection of intellectual property rights. States
Parties undertake to cooperate fully and effectively
with the Authority for this purpose and to ensure that
contractors sponsored by them also cooperate fully
with the Authority;
(c) As a general rule, States Parties shall promote
international technical and scientific cooperation with
regard to activities in the Area either between the
parties concerned or by developing training, technical
assistance and scientific cooperation programmes in
marine science and technology and the protection and
preservation of the marine environment.
Article 145
Protection of the marine environment
Necessary measures shall be taken in accordance with this Convention
with respect to activities in the Area to ensure effective protection for
the marine environment from harmful effects which may arise from
such activities. To this end the Authority shall adopt appropriate rules,
regulations and procedures for inter alia:
(a) the prevention, reduction and control of pollution and other
hazards to the marine environment, including the coastline,
and of interference with the ecological balance of the marine
environment, particular attention being paid to the need for
protection from harmful effects of such activities as drilling,
dredging, excavation, disposal of waste, construction and
operation or maintenance of installations, pipelines and other
devices related to such activities;
(b) the protection and conservation of the natural resources of the
Area and the prevention of damage to the flora and fauna of the
marine environment.
Article 146
Protection of human life
With respect to activities in the Area, necessary measures shall be taken
18

[Page 19]
to ensure effective protection of human life. To this end the Authority
shall adopt appropriate rules, regulations and procedures to supplement
existing international law as embodied in relevant treaties.
Article 147
Accommodation of activities in the Area and in the marine environment
1. Activities in the Area shall be carried out with reasonable regard for
other activities in the marine environment.
2. Installations used for carrying out activities in the Area shall be
subject to the following conditions:
(a) such installations shall be erected, emplaced and removed
solely in accordance with this Part and subject to the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority. Due notice must
be given of the erection, emplacement and removal of such
installations, and permanent means for giving warning of their
presence must be maintained;
(b) such installations may not be established where interference
may be caused to the use of recognized sea lanes essential to
international navigation or in areas of intense fishing activity;
(c) safety zones shall be established around such installations with
appropriate markings to ensure the safety of both navigation
and the installations. The configuration and location of such
safety zones shall not be such as to form a belt impeding the
lawful access of shipping to particular maritime zones or
navigation along international sea lanes;
(d) such installations shall be used exclusively for peaceful
purposes;
(e) such installations do not possess the status of islands. They
have no territorial sea of their own, and their presence does
not affect the delimitation of the territorial sea, the exclusive
economic zone or the continental shelf.
3. Other activities in the marine environment shall be conducted with
reasonable regard for activities in the Area.
Article 148
Participation of developing States in activities in the Area
The effective participation of developing States in activities in the Area
shall be promoted as specifically provided for in this Part, having due
regard to their special interests and needs, and in particular to the special
need of the land-locked and geographically disadvantaged among
19

[Page 20]
them to overcome obstacles arising from their disadvantaged location,
including remoteness from the Area and difficulty of access to and from it.
Article 149
Archaeological and historical objects
All objects of an archaeological and historical nature found in the Area
shall be preserved or disposed of for the benefit of mankind as a whole,
particular regard being paid to the preferential rights of the State or
country of origin, or the State of cultural origin, or the State of historical
and archaeological origin.
SECTION 3. DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES OF THE AREA
Article 150
Policies relating to activities in the Area
Activities in the Area shall, as specifically provided for in this Part, be
carried out in such a manner as to foster healthy development of the world
economy and balanced growth of international trade, and to promote
international cooperation for the over-all development of all countries,
especially developing States, and with a view to ensuring:
(a) the development of the resources of the Area;
(b) orderly, safe and rational management of the resources of the
Area, including the efficient conduct of activities in the Area
and, in accordance with sound principles of conservation, the
avoidance of unnecessary waste;
(c) the expansion of opportunities for participation in such
activities consistent in particular with articles 144 and 148;
(d) participation in revenues by the Authority and the transfer of
technology to the Enterprise and developing States as provided
for in this Convention;
(e) increased availability of the minerals derived from the Area
as needed in conjunction with minerals derived from other
sources, to ensure supplies to consumers of such minerals;
(f) the promotion of just and stable prices remunerative to
producers and fair to consumers for minerals derived both from
the Area and from other sources, and the promotion of long-
term equilibrium between supply and demand;
(g) the enhancement of opportunities for all States Parties,
irrespective of their social and economic systems or geographical
location, to participate in the development of the resources of
20

[Page 21]
the Area and the prevention of monopolization of activities in
the Area;
(h) the protection of developing countries from adverse effects on
their economies or on their export earnings resulting from a
reduction in the price of an affected mineral, or in the volume
of exports of that mineral, to the extent that such reduction is
caused by activities in the Area, as provided in article 151;
(i) the development of the common heritage for the benefit of
mankind as a whole; and
(j) conditions of access to markets for the imports of minerals
produced from the resources of the Area and for imports of
commodities produced from such minerals shall not be more
favourable than the most favourable applied to imports from
other sources.
Article 151
Production policies
[1-7. Do not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 6, paragraph 7]
8. Rights and obligations relating to unfair economic practices under
relevant multilateral trade agreements shall apply to the exploration
for and exploitation of minerals from the Area. In the settlement of
disputes arising under this provision, States Parties which are Parties
to such multilateral trade agreements shall have recourse to the
dispute settlement procedures of such agreements.
[9. Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 6, paragraph 7]
10. Upon the recommendation of the Council on the basis of advice from
the Economic Planning Commission, the Assembly shall establish
a system of compensation or take other measures of economic
adjustment assistance including cooperation with specialized
agencies and other international organizations to assist developing
countries which suffer serious adverse effects on their export
earnings or economies resulting from a reduction in the price of an
affected mineral or in the volume of exports of that mineral, to the
extent that such reduction is caused by activities in the Area. The
Authority on request shall initiate studies on the problems of those
States which are likely to be most seriously affected with a view to
minimizing their difficulties and assisting them in their economic
adjustment.
21

[Page 22]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTIONS 6 AND 7
SECTION 6. PRODUCTION POLICY
1. The production policy of the Authority shall be based on the
following principles:
(a) Development of the resources of the Area shall take
place in accordance with sound commercial principles;
(b) The provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, its relevant codes and successor or superseding
agreements shall apply with respect to activities in the
Area;
(c) In particular, there shall be no subsidization of
activities in the Area except as may be permitted
under the agreements referred to in subparagraph (b).
Subsidization for the purpose of these principles shall
be defined in terms of the agreements referred to in
subparagraph (b);
(d) There shall be no discrimination between minerals
derived from the Area and from other sources. There
shall be no preferential access to markets for such
minerals or for imports of commodities produced from
such minerals, in particular:
(i) By the use of tariff or non-tariff barriers; and
(ii) Given by States Parties to such minerals or
commodities produced by their state enterprises
or by natural or juridical persons which possess
their nationality or are controlled by them or their
nationals;
(e) The plan of work for exploitation approved by the
Authority in respect of each mining area shall indicate
an anticipated production schedule which shall include
the estimated maximum amounts of minerals that
would be produced per year under the plan of work;
(f) The following shall apply to the settlement of disputes
concerning the provisions of the agreements referred
to in subparagraph (b):
(i) Where the States Parties concerned are parties
to such agreements, they shall have recourse
to the dispute settlement procedures of those
agreements;
(ii) Where one or more of the States Parties concerned
22

[Page 23]
are not parties to such agreements, they shall have
recourse to the dispute settlement procedures set
out in the Convention;
(g) In circumstances where a determination is made under
the agreements referred to in subparagraph (b) that
a State Party has engaged in subsidization which is
prohibited or has resulted in adverse effects on the
interests of another State Party and appropriate steps
have not been taken by the relevant State Party or
States Parties, a State Party may request the Council to
take appropriate measures.
2. The principles contained in paragraph 1 shall not affect
the rights and obligations under any provision of the
agreements referred to in paragraph 1 (b), as well as the
relevant free trade and customs union agreements, in
relations between States Parties which are parties to such
agreements.
3. The acceptance by a contractor of subsidies other than
those which may be permitted under the agreements
referred to in paragraph 1 (b) shall constitute a violation
of the fundamental terms of the contract forming a plan of
work for the carrying out of activities in the Area.
4. Any State Party which has reason to believe that there has been
a breach of the requirements of paragraphs 1 (b) to (d) or 3
may initiate dispute settlement procedures in conformity with
paragraph 1 (f) or (g).
5. A State Party may at any time bring to the attention of the
Council activities which in its view are inconsistent with the
requirements of paragraph 1 (b) to (d).
6. The Authority shall develop rules, regulations and
procedures which ensure the implementation of the
provisions of this section, including relevant rules,
regulations and procedures governing the approval of plans
of work.
7. The provisions of article 151, paragraphs 1 to 7 and 9, article
162, paragraph 2 (q), article 165, paragraph 2 (n), and Annex
III, article 6, paragraph 5, and article 7, of the Convention
shall not apply.
SECTION 7. ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
1. The policy of the Authority of assisting developing countries
23

[Page 24]
which suffer serious adverse effects on their export earnings
or economies resulting from a reduction in the price of an
affected mineral or in the volume of exports of that mineral,
to the extent that such reduction caused by activities in the
Area, shall be based on the following principles:
(a) The Authority shall establish an economic assistance
fund from a portion of the funds of the Authority which
exceeds those necessary to cover the administrative
expenses of the Authority. The amount set aside for
this purpose shall be determined by the Council from
time to time, upon the recommendation of the Finance
Committee. Only funds from payments received from
contractors, including the Enterprise, and voluntary
contributions shall be used for the establishment of
the economic assistance fund;
(b) Developing land-based producer States whose
economies have been determined to be seriously
affected by the production of minerals from the deep
seabed shall be assisted from the economic assistance
fund of the Authority;
(c) The Authority shall provide assistance from the fund
to affected developing land-based producer States,
where appropriate, in cooperation with existing
global or regional development institutions which
have the infrastructure and expertise to carry out such
assistance programmes;
(d) The extent and period of such assistance shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis. In doing so,
due consideration shall be given to the nature and
magnitude of the problems encountered by affected
developing land-based producer States.
2. Article 151, paragraph 10, of the Convention shall be
implemented by means of measures of economic assistance
referred to in paragraph 1. Article 160, paragraph 2 (l),
article 162, paragraph 2 (n), article 164, paragraph 2 (d),
article 171, subparagraph (f), and article 173, paragraph 2
(c), of the Convention shall be interpreted accordingly.
Note: The relevant parts of article 151 which, pursuant to
section 6, paragraph 7 of the annex to the Agreement,
shall not apply, formerly read as follows:
24

[Page 25]
1. (a) Without prejudice to the objectives set forth in article
150 and for the purpose of implementing subparagraph
(h) of that article, the Authority, acting through existing
forums or such new arrangements or agreements as
may be appropriate, in which all interested parties,
including both producers and consumers, participate,
shall take measures necessary to promote the
growth, efficiency and stability of markets for those
commodities produced from the minerals derived from
the Area, at prices remunerative to producers and fair
to consumers. All States Parties shall cooperate to this
end.
(b) The Authority shall have the right to participate
in any commodity conference dealing with those
commodities and in which all interested parties
including both producers and consumers participate.
The Authority shall have the right to become a party
to any arrangement or agreement resulting from
such conferences. Participation of the Authority in
any organs established under those arrangements
or agreements shall be in respect of production in the
Area and in accordance with the relevant rules of those
organs.
(c) The Authority shall carry out its obligations under
the arrangements or agreements referred to in this
paragraph in a manner which assures a uniform and
non-discriminatory implementation in respect of all
production in the Area of the minerals concerned. In
doing so, the Authority shall act in a manner consistent
with the terms of existing contracts and approved plans
of work of the Enterprise.
2. (a) During the interim period specified in paragraph 3,
commercial production shall not be undertaken
pursuant to an approved plan of work until the
operator has applied for and has been issued a
production authorization by the Authority. Such
production authorizations may not be applied for
or issued more than five years prior to the planned
commencement of commercial production under
the plan of work unless, having regard to the
nature and timing of project development, the
rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority
25

[Page 26]
prescribe another period.
(b) In the application for the production authorization,
the operator shall specify the annual quantity of
nickel expected to be recovered under the approved
plan of work. The application shall include a schedule
of expenditures to be made by the operator after he
has received the authorization which are reasonably
calculated to allow him to begin commercial production
on the date planned.
(c) For the purposes of subparagraphs (a) and (b), the
Authority shall establish appropriate performance
requirements in accordance with Annex III, article 17.
(d) The Authority shall issue a production authorization
for the level of production applied for unless the sum
of that level and the levels already authorized exceeds
the nickel production ceiling, as calculated pursuant to
paragraph 4 in the year of issuance of the authorization,
during any year of planned production falling within
the interim period.
(e) When issued, the production authorization and
approved application shall become a part of the
approved plan of work.
(f) If the operator’s application for a production
authorization is denied pursuant to subparagraph (d),
the operator may apply again to the Authority at any
time.
3. The interim period shall begin five years prior to 1 January
of the year in which the earliest commercial production is
planned to commence under an approved plan of work. If the
earliest commercial production is delayed beyond the year
originally planned, the beginning of the interim period and
the production ceiling originally calculated shall be adjusted
accordingly. The interim period shall last 25 years or until
the end of the Review Conference referred to in article 155 or
until the day when such new arrangements or agreements
as are referred to in paragraph 1 enter into force, whichever
is earliest. The Authority shall resume the power provided
in this article for the remainder of the interim period if the
said arrangements or agreements should lapse or become
ineffective for any reason whatsoever.
4. (a) The production ceiling for any year of the interim period
shall be the sum of:
26

[Page 27]
(i) the difference between the trend line values for
nickel consumption, as calculated pursuant to
subparagraph (b), for the year immediately prior to
the year of the earliest commercial production and
the year immediately prior to the commencement
of the interim period; and
(ii) sixty per cent of the difference between the trend
line values for nickel consumption, as calculated
pursuant to subparagraph (b), for the year for
which the production authorization is being
applied for and the year immediately prior to the
year of the earliest commercial production.
(b) For the purposes of subparagraph (a):
(i) trend line values used for computing the nickel
production ceiling shall be those annual nickel
consumption values on a trend line computed
during the year in which a production authorization
is issued. The trend line shall be derived from a
linear regression of the logarithms of actual nickel
consumption for the most recent 15-year period
for which such data are available, time being the
independent variable. This trend line shall be
referred to as the original trend line;
(ii) if the annual rate of increase of the original trend
line is less than 3 per cent, then the trend line
used to determine the quantities referred to in
subparagraph (a) shall instead be one passing
through the original trend line at the value for
the first year of the relevant 15-year period, and
increasing at 3 per cent annually; provided however
that the production ceiling established for any year
of the interim period may not in any case exceed
the difference between the original trend line value
for that year and the original trend line value for
the year immediately prior to the commencement
of the interim period.
5. The Authority shall reserve to the Enterprise for its initial
production a quantity of 38,000 metric tonnes of nickel
from the available production ceiling calculated pursuant to
paragraph 4.
6. (a) An operator may in any year produce less than or
up to 8 per cent more than the level of annual
27

[Page 28]
production of minerals from polymetallic nodules
specified in his production authorization, provided
that the over-all amount of production shall not
exceed that specified in the authorization. Any
excess over 8 per cent and up to 20 per cent in any
year, or any excess in the first and subsequent years
following two consecutive years in which excesses
occur, shall be negotiated with the Authority, which
may require the operator to obtain a supplementary
production authorization to cover additional
production.
(b) Applications for such supplementary production
authorizations shall be considered by the Authority
only after all pending applications by operators who
have not yet received production authorizations have
been acted upon and due account has been taken of
other likely applicants. The Authority shall be guided
by the principle of not exceeding the total production
allowed under the production ceiling in any year of the
interim period. It shall not authorize the production
under any plan of work of a quantity in excess of 46,500
metric tonnes of nickel per year.
7. The levels of production of other metals such as copper,
cobalt and manganese extracted from the polymetallic
nodules that are recovered pursuant to a production
authorization should not be higher than those which
would have been produced had the operator produced the
maximum level of nickel from those nodules pursuant to this
article. The Authority shall establish rules, regulations and
procedures pursuant to Annex III, article 17, to implement
this paragraph.
…
9. The Authority shall have the power to limit the level of
production of minerals from the Area, other than minerals
from polymetallic nodules, under such conditions and
applying such methods as may be appropriate by adopting
regulations in accordance with article 161, paragraph 8.
28

[Page 29]
Article 152
Exercise of powers and functions by the Authority
1. The Authority shall avoid discrimination in the exercise of its powers
and functions, including the granting of opportunities for activities
in the Area.
2. Nevertheless, special consideration for developing States, including
particular consideration for the land-locked and geographically
disadvantaged among them, specifically provided for in this Part
shall be permitted.
Article 153
System of exploration and exploitation
1. Activities in the Area shall be organized, carried out and controlled
by the Authority on behalf of mankind as a whole in accordance with
this article as well as other relevant provisions of this Part and the
relevant Annexes, and the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Authority.
2. Activities in the Area shall be carried out as prescribed in paragraph 3:
(a) by the Enterprise, and
(b) in association with the Authority by States Parties, or state
enterprises or natural or juridical persons which possess the
nationality of States Parties or are effectively controlled by them
or their nationals, when sponsored by such States, or any group
of the foregoing which meets the requirements provided in this
Part and in Annex III.
3. Activities in the Area shall be carried out in accordance with a formal
written plan of work drawn up in accordance with Annex III and
approved by the Council after review by the Legal and Technical
Commission. In the case of activities in the Area carried out as
authorized by the Authority by the entities specified in paragraph
2(b), the plan of work shall, in accordance with Annex III, article 3,
be in the form of a contract. Such contracts may provide for joint
arrangements in accordance with Annex III, article 11.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 2, PARAGRAPH 4
4. The obligations applicable to contractors shall apply to
the Enterprise. Notwithstanding the provisions of article
153, paragraph 3, and Annex III, article 3, paragraph 5, of
the Convention, a plan of work for the Enterprise upon
29

[Page 30]
its approval shall be in the form of a contract concluded
between the Authority and the Enterprise.
4. The Authority shall exercise such control over activities in the Area
as is necessary for the purpose of securing compliance with the
relevant provisions of this Part and the Annexes relating thereto, and
the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, and the plans
of work approved in accordance with paragraph 3. States Parties
shall assist the Authority by taking all measures necessary to ensure
such compliance in accordance with article 139.
5. The Authority shall have the right to take at any time any measures
provided for under this Part to ensure compliance with its provisions
and the exercise of the functions of control and regulation assigned
to it thereunder or under any contract. The Authority shall have the
right to inspect all installations in the Area used in connection with
activities in the Area.
6. A contract under paragraph 3 shall provide for security of tenure.
Accordingly, the contract shall not be revised, suspended or
terminated except in accordance with Annex III, articles 18 and 19.
Article 154
Periodic review
Every five years from the entry into force of this Convention, the Assembly
shall undertake a general and systematic review of the manner in which
the international regime of the Area established in this Convention has
operated in practice. In the light of this review the Assembly may take,
or recommend that other organs take, measures in accordance with the
provisions and procedures of this Part and the Annexes relating thereto
which will lead to the improvement of the operation of the regime.
Article 155
The Review Conference
[1. Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 4]
2. The Review Conference shall ensure the maintenance of the
principle of the common heritage of mankind, the international
regime designed to ensure equitable exploitation of the resources
of the Area for the benefit of all countries, especially the developing
States, and an Authority to organize, conduct and control activities
in the Area. It shall also ensure the maintenance of the principles laid
down in this Part with regard to the exclusion of claims or exercise
30

[Page 31]
of sovereignty over any part of the Area, the rights of States and
their general conduct in relation to the Area, and their participation
in activities in the Area in conformity with this Convention, the
prevention of monopolization of activities in the Area, the use of the
Area exclusively for peaceful purposes, economic aspects of activities
in the Area, marine scientific research, transfer of technology,
protection of the marine environment, protection of human life,
rights of coastal States, the legal status of the waters superjacent
to the Area and that of the air space above those waters and
accommodation between activities in the Area and other activities
in the marine environment.
[3. Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 4]
[4. Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 4]
5. Amendments adopted by the Review Conference pursuant to this
article shall not affect rights acquired under existing contracts.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 4
SECTION 4. REVIEW CONFERENCE
The provisions relating to the Review Conference in article
155, paragraphs 1, 3 and 4, of the Convention shall not apply.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 314, paragraph 2, of
the Convention, the Assembly, on the recommendation of the
Council, may undertake at any time a review of the matters
referred to in article 155, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
Amendments relating to this Agreement and Part XI shall be
subject to the procedures contained in articles 314, 315 and
316 of the Convention, provided that the principles, regime
and other terms referred to in article 155, paragraph 2, of the
Convention shall be maintained and the rights referred to in
paragraph 5 of that article shall not be affected.
Note: The relevant parts of article 155 which, pursuant to
section 4 of the annex to the Agreement, shall not
apply, formerly read as follows:
1. Fifteen years from 1 January of the year in which the earliest
commercial production commences under an approved
plan of work, the Assembly shall convene a conference
for the review of those provisions of this Part and the
31

[Page 32]
relevant Annexes which govern the system of exploration
and exploitation of the resources of the Area. The Review
Conference shall consider in detail, in the light of the
experience acquired during that period:
(a) whether the provisions of this Part which govern the
system of exploration and exploitation of the resources
of the Area have achieved their aims in all respects,
including whether they have benefited mankind as a
whole;
(b) whether, during the 15-year period, reserved areas have
been exploited in an effective and balanced manner in
comparison with non-reserved areas;
(c) whether the development and use of the Area and its
resources have been undertaken in such a manner as to
foster healthy development of the world economy and
balanced growth of international trade;
(d) whether monopolization of activities in the Area has
been prevented;
(e) whether the policies set forth in articles 150 and 151
have been fulfilled; and
(f) whether the system has resulted in the equitable
sharing of benefits derived from activities in the Area,
taking into particular consideration the interests and
needs of the developing States.
…
3. The decision-making procedure applicable at the Review
Conference shall be the same as that applicable at the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The
Conference shall make every effort to reach agreement on
any amendments by way of consensus and there should
be no voting on such matters until all efforts at achieving
consensus have been exhausted.
4. If, five years after its commencement, the Review Conference
has not reached agreement on the system of exploration
and exploitation of the resources of the Area, it may decide
during the ensuing 12 months, by a three-fourths majority of
the States Parties, to adopt and submit to the States Parties
for ratification or accession such amendments changing
or modifying the system as it determines necessary and
appropriate. Such amendments shall enter into force for all
States Parties 12 months after the deposit of instruments of
ratification or accession by three fourths of the States Parties.
32

[Page 33]
SECTION 4. THE AUTHORITY
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPH 17
17. The relevant provisions of Part XI, section 4, of the
Convention shall be interpreted and applied in accordance
with this Agreement.
SUBSECTION A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 156
Establishment of the Authority
1. There is hereby established the International Seabed Authority,
which shall function in accordance with this Part.
2. All States Parties are ipso facto members of the Authority.
3. Observers at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea who have signed the Final Act and who are not referred to
in article 305, paragraph 1(c), (d), (e) or (f), shall have the right to
participate in the Authority as observers, in accordance with its rules,
regulations and procedures.
4. The seat of the Authority shall be in Jamaica.
5. The Authority may establish such regional centres or offices as it
deems necessary for the exercise of its functions.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPH 12
12. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, States and
entities referred to in article 3 of this Agreement which have
been applying it provisionally in accordance with article 7
and for which it is not in force may continue to be members
of the Authority on a provisional basis pending its entry into
force for such States and entities, in accordance with the
following subparagraphs:
(a) If this Agreement enters into force before 16
November 1996, such States and entities shall be
entitled to continue to participate as members of the
Authority on a provisional basis upon notification to
the depositary of the Agreement by such a State or
entity of its intention to participate as a member on
a provisional basis. Such membership shall terminate
either on 16 November 1996 or upon the entry into
33

[Page 34]
force of this Agreement and the Convention for such
member, whichever is earlier. The Council may, upon
the request of the State or entity concerned, extend
such membership beyond 16 November 1996 for a
further period or periods not exceeding a total of two
years provided that the Council is satisfied that the
State or entity concerned has been making efforts in
good faith to become a party to the Agreement and
the Convention;
(b) If this Agreement enters into force after 15 November
1996, such State and entities may request the Council
to grant continued membership in the Authority on a
provisional basis for a period or periods not extending
beyond 16 November 1998. The Council shall grant
such membership with effect from the date of the
request if it is satisfied that the State or entity has been
making efforts in good faith to become a party to the
Agreement and the Convention;
(c) States and entities which are members of the
Authority on a provisional basis in accordance with
subparagraph (a) or (b) shall apply the terms of Part XI
and this Agreement in accordance with their national
or internal laws, regulations and annual budgetary
appropriations and shall have the same rights and
obligations as other members, including:
(i) The obligation to contribute to the administrative
budget of the Authority in accordance with the
scale of assessed contributions;
(ii) The right to sponsor an application for approval
of a plan of work for exploration. In the case of
entities whose components are natural or juridical
persons possessing the nationality of more than
one State, a plan of work for exploration shall not
be approved unless all the States whose natural or
juridical persons comprise those entities are States
Parties or members on a provisional basis;
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 9,
an approved plan of work in the form of a contract
for exploration which was sponsored pursuant to
subparagraph (c) (ii) by a State which was a member on
a provisional basis shall terminate if such membership
ceases and the State or entity has not become a State
34

[Page 35]
Party;
(e) If such a member has failed to make its assessed
contributions or otherwise failed to comply with its
obligations in accordance with this paragraph, its
membership on a provisional basis shall be terminated.
Article 157
Nature and fundamental principles of the Authority
1. The Authority is the organization through which States Parties shall,
in accordance with this Part, organize and control activities in the
Area, particularly with a view to administering the resources of the
Area.
2. The powers and functions of the Authority shall be those expressly
conferred upon it by this Convention. The Authority shall have such
incidental powers consistent with this Convention, as are implicit in
and necessary for the exercise of those powers and functions with
respect to activities in the Area.
3. The Authority is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of
all its members.
4. All members of the Authority shall fulfil in good faith the obligations
assumed by them in accordance with this Part in order to ensure to
all of them the rights and benefits resulting from membership.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPH 1
1. The International Seabed Authority (hereinafter referred
to as “the Authority”) is the organization through which
States Parties to the Convention shall, in accordance with
the regime for the Area established in Part XI and this
Agreement, organize and control activities in the Area,
particularly with a view to administering the resources of
the Area. The powers and functions of the Authority shall
be those expressly conferred upon it by the Convention.
The Authority shall have such incidental powers, consistent
with the Convention, as are implicit in, and necessary for,
the exercise of those powers and functions with respect to
activities in the Area.
35

[Page 36]
Article 158
Organs of the Authority
1. There are hereby established, as the principal organs of the Authority,
an Assembly, a Council and a Secretariat.
2. There is hereby established the Enterprise, the organ through which
the Authority shall carry out the functions referred to in article 170,
paragraph 1.
3. Such subsidiary organs as may be found necessary may be established
in accordance with this Part.
4. Each principal organ of the Authority and the Enterprise shall be
responsible for exercising those powers and functions which are
conferred upon it. In exercising such powers and functions each
organ shall avoid taking any action which may derogate from or
impede the exercise of specific powers and functions conferred
upon another organ.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 2 TO 5
2. In order to minimize costs to States Parties, all organs and
subsidiary bodies to be established under the Convention
and this Agreement shall be cost-effective. This principle
shall also apply to the frequency, duration and scheduling
of meetings.
3. The setting up and the functioning of the organs and
subsidiary bodies of the Authority shall be based on an
evolutionary approach, taking into account the functional
needs of the organs and subsidiary bodies concerned in
order that they may discharge effectively their respective
responsibilities at various stages of the development of
activities in the Area.
4. The early functions of the Authority upon entry into force
of the Convention shall be carried out by the Assembly, the
Council, the Secretariat, the Legal and Technical Commission
and the Finance Committee. The functions of the Economic
Planning Commission shall be performed by the Legal and
Technical Commission until such time as the Council decides
otherwise or until the approval of the first plan of work for
exploitation.
5. Between the entry into force of the Convention and the
approval of the first plan of work for exploitation, the
Authority shall concentrate on:
36

[Page 37]
(a) Processing of applications for approval of plans of
work for exploration in accordance with Part XI and
this Agreement;
(b) Implementation of decisions of the Preparatory
Commission for the International Seabed Authority
and for the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea (hereinafter referred to as “the Preparatory
Commission”) relating to the registered pioneer
investors and their certifying States, including their
rights and obligations, in accordance with article
308, paragraph 5, of the Convention and resolution II,
paragraph 13;
(c) Monitoring of compliance with plans of work for
exploration approved in the form of contracts;
(d) Monitoring and review of trends and developments
relating to deep seabed mining activities, including
regular analysis of world metal market conditions and
metal prices, trends and prospects;
(e) Study of the potential impact of mineral production
from the Area on the economies of developing land-
based producers of those minerals which are likely to
be most seriously affected, with a view to minimizing
their difficulties and assisting them in their economic
adjustment, taking into account the work done in this
regard by the Preparatory Commission;
(f) Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures
necessary for the conduct of activities in the Area as
they progress. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Annex III, article 17, paragraph 2 (b) and (c), of the
Convention, such rules, regulations and procedures
shall take into account the terms of this Agreement,
the prolonged delay in commercial deep seabed
mining and the likely pace of activities in the Area;
(g) Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures
incorporating applicable standards for the protection
and preservation of the marine environment;
(h) Promotion and encouragement of the conduct of
marine scientific research with respect to activities in
the Area and the collection and dissemination of the
results of such research and analysis, when available,
with particular emphasis on research related to the
environmental impact of activities in the Area;
37

[Page 38]
(i) Acquisition of scientific knowledge and monitoring
of the development of marine technology relevant to
activities in the Area, in particular technology relating
to the protection and preservation of the marine
environment;
(j) Assessment of available data relating to prospecting
and exploration;
(k) Timely elaboration of rules, regulations and
procedures for exploitation, including those relating
to the protection and preservation of the marine
environment.
SUBSECTION B. THE ASSEMBLY
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPH 14
14. Part XI, section 4, subsection[s] B …, of the Convention shall
be interpreted and applied in accordance with this section.
Article 159
Composition, procedure and voting
1. The Assembly shall consist of all the members of the Authority. Each
member shall have one representative in the Assembly, who may be
accompanied by alternates and advisers.
2. The Assembly shall meet in regular annual sessions and in such
special sessions as may be decided by the Assembly, or convened by
the Secretary-General at the request of the Council or of a majority of
the members of the Authority.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 2 AND 3
2. In order to minimize costs to States Parties, all organs and
subsidiary bodies to be established under the Convention
and this Agreement shall be cost-effective. This principle
shall also apply to the frequency, duration and scheduling
of meetings.
3. The setting up and the functioning of the organs and
subsidiary bodies of the Authority shall be based on an
evolutionary approach, taking into account the functional
needs of the organs and subsidiary bodies concerned in
order that they may discharge effectively their respective
38

[Page 39]
responsibilities at various stages of the development of
activities in the Area.
3. Sessions shall take place at the seat of the Authority unless otherwise
decided by the Assembly.
4. The Assembly shall adopt its rules of procedure. At the beginning of
each regular session, it shall elect its President and such other officers
as may be required. They shall hold office until a new President and
other officers are elected at the next regular session.
5. A majority of the members of the Assembly shall constitute a quorum.
6. Each member of the Assembly shall have one vote.
7. Decisions on questions of procedure, including decisions to convene
special sessions of the Assembly, shall be taken by a majority of the
members present and voting.
8. Decisions on questions of substance shall be taken by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting, provided that such
majority includes a majority of the members participating in the
session. When the issue arises as to whether a question is one of
substance or not, that question shall be treated as one of substance
unless otherwise decided by the Assembly by the majority required
for decisions on questions of substance.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPHS 2, 3, 4 AND 7
2. As a general rule, decision-making in the organs of the
Authority should be by consensus.
3. If all efforts to reach a decision by consensus have been
exhausted, decisions by voting in the Assembly on questions
of procedure shall be taken by a majority of members
present and voting, and decisions on questions of substance
shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of members present
and voting, as provided for in article 159, paragraph 8, of
the Convention.
4. Decisions of the Assembly on any matter for which the
Council also has competence or on any administrative
budgetary or financial matter shall be based on the
recommendations of the Council. If the Assembly does
not accept the recommendation of the Council on any
matter, it shall return the matter to the Council for further
consideration. The Council shall reconsider the matter in
the light of the views expressed by the Assembly.
…
39

[Page 40]
7. Decisions by the Assembly or the Council having
financial or budgetary implications shall be based on the
recommendations of the Finance Committee.
9. When a question of substance comes up for voting for the first time,
the President may, and shall, if requested by at least one fifth of the
members of the Assembly, defer the issue of taking a vote on that
question for a period not exceeding five calendar days. This rule may
be applied only once to any question and shall not be applied so as
to defer the question beyond the end of the session.
10. Upon a written request addressed to the President and sponsored by
at least one fourth of the members of the Authority for an advisory
opinion on the conformity with this Convention of a proposal before
the Assembly on any matter, the Assembly shall request the Seabed
Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
to give an advisory opinion thereon and shall defer voting on that
proposal pending receipt of the advisory opinion by the Chamber.
If the advisory opinion is not received before the final week of the
session in which it is requested, the Assembly shall decide when it
will meet to vote upon the deferred proposal.
Article 160
Powers and functions
1. The Assembly as the sole organ of the Authority consisting of all the
members, shall be considered the supreme organ of the Authority to
which the other principal organs shall be accountable as specifically
provided for in this Convention. The Assembly shall have the
power to establish general policies in conformity with the relevant
provisions of this Convention on any question or matter within the
competence of the Authority.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPH 1
1. The general policies of the Authority shall be established by
the Assembly in collaboration with the Council.
2. In addition, the powers and functions of the Assembly shall be:
(a) to elect the members of the Council in accordance with article
161;
(b) to elect the Secretary-General from among the candidates
proposed by the Council;
40

[Page 41]
(c) to elect, upon the recommendation of the Council, the members
of the Governing Board of the Enterprise and the Director-
General of the Enterprise;
(d) to establish such subsidiary organs as it finds necessary for the
exercise of its functions in accordance with this Part. In the
composition of these subsidiary organs due account shall be
taken of the principle of equitable geographical distribution
and of special interests and the need for members qualified and
competent in the relevant technical questions dealt with by
such organs;
(e) to assess the contributions of members to the administrative
budget of the Authority in accordance with an agreed scale of
assessment based upon the scale used for the regular budget
of the United Nations until the Authority shall have sufficient
income from other sources to meet its administrative expenses;
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 9, PARAGRAPH 7
7. Decisions by the Assembly and the Council on the following
issues shall take into account recommendations of the
Finance Committee:
…
(b) Assessment of contributions of members to the
administrative budget of the Authority in accordance
with article 160, paragraph 2 (e), of the Convention;
…
(f) (i) to consider and approve, upon the recommendation of
the Council, the rules, regulations and procedures on the
equitable sharing of financial and other economic benefits
derived from activities in the Area and the payments
and contributions made pursuant to article 82, taking
into particular consideration the interests and needs of
developing States and peoples who have not attained
full independence or other self-governing status. If the
Assembly does not approve the recommendations of the
Council, the Assembly shall return them to the Council for
reconsideration in the light of the views expressed by the
Assembly;
(ii) to consider and approve the rules, regulations and
41

[Page 42]
procedures of the Authority, and any amendments
thereto, provisionally adopted by the Council pursuant
to article 162, paragraph 2 (o)(ii). These rules, regulations
and procedures shall relate to prospecting, exploration
and exploitation in the Area, the financial management
and internal administration of the Authority, and, upon
the recommendation of the Governing Board of the
Enterprise, to the transfer of funds from the Enterprise to
the Authority;
(g) to decide upon the equitable sharing of financial and other
economic benefits derived from activities in the Area, consistent
with this Convention and the rules, regulations and procedures
of the Authority;
(h) to consider and approve the proposed annual budget of the
Authority submitted by the Council;
(i) to examine periodic reports from the Council and from the
Enterprise and special reports requested from the Council or
any other organ of the Authority;
(j) to initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose
of promoting international cooperation concerning activities
in the Area and encouraging the progressive development of
international law relating thereto and its codification;
(k) to consider problems of a general nature in connection with
activities in the Area arising in particular for developing States, as
well as those problems for States in connection with activities in
the Area that are due to their geographical location, particularly
for land-locked and geographically disadvantaged States;
(l) to establish, upon the recommendation of the Council, on
the basis of advice from the Economic Planning Commission,
a system of compensation or other measures of economic
adjustment assistance as provided in article 151, paragraph 10;
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 7, PARAGRAPH 2
2. Article 151, paragraph 10, of the Convention shall be
implemented by means of measures of economic assistance
referred to in paragraph
1. Article 160, paragraph 2 (l) … of the Convention shall be interpreted
accordingly.
(m) to suspend the exercise of rights and privileges of membership
pursuant to article 185;
42

[Page 43]
(n) to discuss any question or matter within the competence of the
Authority and to decide as to which organ of the Authority shall
deal with any such question or matter not specifically entrusted
to a particular organ, consistent with the distribution of powers
and functions among the organs of the Authority.
SUBSECTION C. THE COUNCIL
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPH 14
14. Part XI, section 4, subsection[s] … C, of the Convention shall
be interpreted and applied in accordance with this section.
Article 161
Composition, procedure and voting
[1. Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 3, paragraph 16]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPHS 15, 16, 9 AND 10
15. The Council shall consist of 36 members of the Authority
elected by the Assembly in the following order:
(a) Four members from among those States Parties
which, during the last five years for which statistics are
available, have either consumed more than 2 per cent
in value terms of total world consumption or have had
net imports of more than 2 per cent in value terms of
total world imports of the commodities produced from
the categories of minerals to be derived from the Area,
provided that the four members shall include one State
from the Eastern European region having the largest
economy in that region in terms of gross domestic
product and the State, on the date of entry into force of
the Convention, having the largest economy in terms
of gross domestic product, if such States wish to be
represented in this group;
(b) Four members from among the eight States Parties
which have made the largest investments in
preparation for and in the conduct of activities in the
Area, either directly or through their nationals;
(c) Four members from among States Parties which, on the
basis of production in areas under their jurisdiction,
43

[Page 44]
are major net exporters of the categories of minerals
to be derived from the Area, including at least two
developing States whose exports of such minerals
have a substantial bearing upon their economies;
(d) Six members from among developing States Parties,
representing special interests. The special interests
to be represented shall include those of States with
large populations, States which are land-locked or
geographically disadvantaged, island States, States
which are major importers of the categories of minerals
to be derived from the Area, States which are potential
producers of such minerals and least developed States;
(e) Eighteen members elected according to the principle
of ensuring an equitable geographical distribution
of seats in the Council as a whole, provided that each
geographical region shall have at least one member
elected under this subparagraph. For this purpose,
the geographical regions shall be Africa, Asia, Eastern
Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean and Western
Europe and Others.
16. The provisions of article 161, paragraph 1, of the Convention
shall not apply.
…
9. (a) Each group of States elected under paragraph 15 (a)
to (c) shall be treated as a chamber for the purposes
of voting in the Council. The developing States
elected under paragraph 15 (d) and (e) shall be
treated as a single chamber for the purposes of
voting in the Council.
(b) Before electing the members of the Council, the
Assembly shall establish lists of countries fulfilling
the criteria for membership in the groups of States
in paragraph 15 (a) to (d). If a State fulfils the criteria
for membership in more than one group, it may only
be proposed by one group for election to the Council
and it shall represent only that group in voting in the
Council.
10. Each group of States in paragraph 15 (a) to (d) shall be
represented in the Council by those members nominated
by that group. Each group shall nominate only as many
candidates as the number of seats required to be filled
44

[Page 45]
by that group. When the number of potential candidates
in each of the groups referred to in paragraph 15 (a) to
(e) exceeds the number of seats available in each of those
respective groups, as a general rule, the principle of rotation
shall apply. States members of each of those groups shall
determine how this principle shall apply in those groups.
2. In electing the members of the Council in accordance with paragraph
1,1 the Assembly shall ensure that:
(a) land-locked and geographically disadvantaged States are
represented to a degree which is reasonably proportionate to
their representation in the Assembly;
(b) coastal States, especially developing States, which do not qualify
under paragraph 1(a), (b) (c) or (d) are represented to a degree
which is reasonably proportionate to their representation in the
Assembly;
(c) each group of States Parties to be represented on the Council is
represented by those members, if any, which are nominated by
that group.
3. Elections shall take place at regular sessions of the Assembly. Each
member of the Council shall be elected for four years. At the first
election, however, the term of one half of the members of each
group referred to in paragraph 1 shall be two years.2
4. Members of the Council shall be eligible for re-election, but due
regard should be paid to the desirability of rotation of membership.
5. The Council shall function at the seat of the Authority, and shall meet
as often as the business of the Authority may require, but not less
than three times a year.
1 Paragraph 1 of article 161 does not apply. However, an equivalent provision occurs in
the Agreement, annex, section 3, paragraph 15. In accordance with article 2, paragraph 1, of
the Agreement, the provisions of the Agreement and Part XI shall be interpreted and applied
together as a single instrument. In the event of any inconsistency between the Agreement and
Part XI, the provisions of the Agreement shall prevail.
2 Paragraph 1 of article 161 does not apply. However, an equivalent provision occurs in
the Agreement, annex, section 3, paragraph 15. In accordance with article 2, paragraph 1, of
the Agreement, the provisions of the Agreement and Part XI shall be interpreted and applied
together as a single instrument. In the event of any inconsistency between the Agreement and
Part XI, the provisions of the Agreement shall prevail.
45

[Page 46]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 2 AND 3
2. In order to minimize costs to States Parties, all organs and
subsidiary bodies to be established under the Convention
and this Agreement shall be cost-effective. This principle
shall also apply to the frequency, duration and scheduling
of meetings.
3. The setting up and the functioning of the organs and
subsidiary bodies of the Authority shall be based on an
evolutionary approach, taking into account the functional
needs of the organs and subsidiary bodies concerned in
order that they may discharge effectively their respective
responsibilities at various stages of the development of
activities in the Area.
6. A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
7. Each member of the Council shall have one vote.
8. (a) Decisions on questions of procedure shall be taken by a majority
of the members present and voting.
[(b) Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 3, paragraph 8]
[(c) Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 3, paragraph 8]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPH 8
8. The provisions of article 161, paragraph 8 (b) and (c), of the
Convention shall not apply.
(d) Decisions on questions of substance arising under the following
provisions shall be taken by consensus: article 162, paragraph
2(m) and (o); adoption of amendments to Part XI.
(e) For the purposes of subparagraphs (d), (f) and (g), “consensus”
means the absence of any formal objection. Within 14 days of
the submission of a proposal to the Council, the President of
the Council shall determine whether there would be a formal
objection to the adoption of the proposal. If the President
determines that there would be such an objection, the President
shall establish and convene, within three days following such
determination, a conciliation committee consisting of not
more than nine members of the Council, with the President as
chairman, for the purpose of reconciling the differences and
producing a proposal which can be adopted by consensus. The
committee shall work expeditiously and report to the Council
46

[Page 47]
within 14 days following its establishment. If the committee
is unable to recommend a proposal which can be adopted by
consensus, it shall set out in its report the grounds on which the
proposal is being opposed.
(f) Decisions on questions not listed above which the Council is
authorized to take by the rules, regulations and procedures
of the Authority or otherwise shall be taken pursuant to
the subparagraphs of this paragraph specified in the rules,
regulations and procedures or, if not specified therein, then
pursuant to the subparagraph determined by the Council if
possible in advance, by consensus.
(g) When the issue arises as to whether a question is within
subparagraph (a), (b), (c) or (d), the question shall be treated as
being within the subparagraph requiring the higher or highest
majority or consensus as the case may be, unless otherwise
decided by the Council by the said majority or by consensus.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPHS 2, 5 TO 7
2. As a general rule, decision-making in the organs of the
Authority should be by consensus.
…
5. If all efforts to reach a decision by consensus have been
exhausted, decisions by voting in the Council on questions of
procedure shall be taken by a majority of members present
and voting, and decisions on questions of substance, except
where the Convention provides for decisions by consensus
in the Council, shall be taken by a two-thirds majority of
members present and voting, provided that such decisions
are not opposed by a majority in any one of the chambers
referred to in paragraph 9. In taking decisions the Council
shall seek to promote the interests of all the members of the
Authority.
6. The Council may defer the taking of a decision in order to
facilitate further negotiation whenever it appears that all
efforts at achieving consensus on a question have not been
exhausted.
7. Decisions by the Assembly or the Council having
financial or budgetary implications shall be based on the
recommendations of the Finance Committee.
47

[Page 48]
9. The Council shall establish a procedure whereby a member
of the Authority not represented on the Council may send
a representative to attend a meeting of the Council when
a request is made by such member, or a matter particularly
affecting it is under consideration. Such a representative shall
be entitled to participate in the deliberations but not to vote.
Note: The relevant provisions of article 161 which, pursuant to
section 3, paragraph 8 of the annex to the Agreement,
shall not apply, formerly read as follows:
1. The Council shall consist of 36 members of the Authority
elected by the Assembly in the following order:
(a) four members from among those States Parties
which, during the last five years for which statistics are
available, have either consumed more than 2 per cent
of total world consumption or have had net imports
of more than 2 per cent of total world imports of the
commodities produced from the categories of minerals
to be derived from the Area, and in any case one State
from the Eastern European (Socialist) region, as well as
the largest consumer;
(b) four members from among the eight States Parties
which have the largest investments in preparation
for and in the conduct of activities in the Area, either
directly or through their nationals, including at least
one State from the Eastern European (Socialist) region;
(c) Four members from among States Parties which on
the basis of production in areas under their jurisdiction
are major net exporters of the categories of minerals
to be derived from the Area, including at least two
developing States whose exports of such minerals have
a substantial bearing upon their economies;
(d) six members from among developing States Parties,
representing special interests. The special interests
to be represented shall include those of States with
large populations, States which are land-locked or
geographically disadvantaged, States which are major
importers of the categories of minerals to be derived
from the Area, States which are potential producers of
such minerals, and least developed States;
(e) eighteen members elected according to the principle
48

[Page 49]
of ensuring an equitable geographical distribution
of seats in the Council as a whole, provided that each
geographical region shall have at least one member
elected under this subparagraph. For this purpose,
the geographical regions shall be Africa, Asia, Eastern
European (Socialist), Latin America and Western
European and Others.
…
8. (b) Decisions on questions of substance arising under the
following provisions shall be taken by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting,
provided that such majority includes a majority of
the members of the Council: article 162, paragraph
2, subparagraphs (f); (g); (h); (i); (n); (p); (v); article
191.
(c) Decisions on questions of substance arising under the
following provisions shall be taken by a three-fourths
majority of the members present and voting, provided
that such majority includes a majority of the members
of the Council: article 162, paragraph 1; article 162,
paragraph 2, subparagraphs (a); (b); (c); (d); (e); (l);
(q); (r); (s); (t); (u) in cases of non-compliance by a
contractor or a sponsor; (w) provided that orders issued
thereunder may be binding for not more than 30 days
unless confirmed by a decision taken in accordance
with subparagraph (d); article 162, paragraph 2,
subparagraphs (x); (y); (z); article 163, paragraph 2;
article 174, paragraph 3; Annex IV, article 11.
Article 162
Powers and functions
1. The Council is the executive organ of the Authority. The Council shall
have the power to establish, in conformity with this Convention and
the general policies established by the Assembly, the specific policies
to be pursued by the Authority on any question or matter within the
competence of the Authority.
2. In addition, the Council shall:
(a) supervise and coordinate the implementation of the provisions
of this Part on all questions and matters within the competence
of the Authority and invite the attention of the Assembly to
49

[Page 50]
cases of non-compliance;
(b) propose to the Assembly a list of candidates for the election of
the Secretary-General;
(c) recommend to the Assembly candidates for the election of the
members of the Governing Board of the Enterprise and the
Director-General of the Enterprise;
(d) establish, as appropriate, and with due regard to economy and
efficiency, such subsidiary organs as it finds necessary for the
exercise of its functions in accordance with this Part. In the
composition of subsidiary organs, emphasis shall be placed
on the need for members qualified and competent in relevant
technical matters dealt with by those organs provided that due
account shall be taken of the principle of equitable geographical
distribution and of special interests;
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 2 AND 3
2. In order to minimize costs to States Parties, all organs
and subsidiary bodies to be established under the
Convention and this Agreement shall be cost-effective.
This principle shall also apply to the frequency,
duration and scheduling of meetings.
3. The setting up and the functioning of the organs and
subsidiary bodies of the Authority shall be based on
an evolutionary approach, taking into account the
functional needs of the organs and subsidiary bodies
concerned in order that they may discharge effectively
their respective responsibilities at various stages of
the development of activities in the Area.
(e) adopt its rules of procedure including the method of selecting
its president;
(f) enter into agreements with the United Nations or other
international organizations on behalf of the Authority and
within its competence, subject to approval by the Assembly;
(g) consider the reports of the Enterprise and transmit them to the
Assembly with its recommendations;
(h) present to the Assembly annual reports and such special reports
as the Assembly may request;
(i) issue directives to the Enterprise in accordance with article 170;
[(j) Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 3, paragraph
11(b)]
50

[Page 51]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPHS 11 AND 12
11. (a) The Council shall approve a recommendation by the
Legal and Technical Commission for approval of a
plan of work unless by a two-thirds majority of its
members present and voting, including a majority
of members present and voting in each of the
chambers of the Council, the Council decides to
disapprove a plan of work. If the Council does not
take a decision on a recommendation for approval
of a plan of work within a prescribed period, the
recommendation shall be deemed to have been
approved by the Council at the end of that period.
The prescribed period shall normally be 60 days
unless the Council decides to provide for a longer
period. If the Commission recommends the
disapproval of a plan of work or does not make a
recommendation, the Council may nevertheless
approve the plan of work in accordance with
its rules of procedure for decision-making on
questions of substance.
(b) The provisions of article 162, paragraph 2 (j), of the
Convention shall not apply.
12. Where a dispute arises relating to the disapproval of a plan
of work, such dispute shall be submitted to the dispute
settlement procedures set out in the Convention.
(k) approve plans of work submitted by the Enterprise in
accordance with Annex IV, article 12, applying, mutatis
mutandis, the procedures set forth in subparagraphs (j);
(l) exercise control over activities in the Area in accordance
with article 153, paragraph 4, and the rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority;
(m) take, upon the recommendation of the Economic Planning
Commission, necessary and appropriate measures in accordance
with article 150, subparagraph (h), to provide protection from
the adverse economic effects specified therein;
(n) make recommendations to the Assembly, on the basis of
advice from the Economic Planning Commission, for a system
of compensation or other measures of economic adjustment
assistance as provided in article 151, paragraph 10;
51

[Page 52]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 7, PARAGRAPH 2
2. Article 151, paragraph 10, of the Convention shall be
implemented by means of measures of economic assistance
referred to in paragraph 1. … article 162, paragraph 2 (n) …
of the Convention shall be interpreted accordingly.
(o) (i) recommend to the Assembly rules, regulations and
procedures on the equitable sharing of financial and other
economic benefits derived from activities in the Area and
the payments and contributions made pursuant to article
82, taking into particular consideration the interests and
needs of the developing States and peoples who have
not attained full independence or other self-governing
status;
(ii) adopt and apply provisionally, pending approval by the
Assembly, the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Authority, and any amendments thereto, taking into
account the recommendations of the Legal and Technical
Commission or other subordinate organ concerned.
These rules, regulations and procedures shall relate to
prospecting, exploration and exploitation in the Area and
the financial management and internal administration
of the Authority. Priority shall be given to the adoption
of rules, regulations and procedures for the exploration
for and exploitation of polymetallic nodules. Rules,
regulations and procedures for the exploration for and
exploitation of any resource other than polymetallic
nodules shall be adopted within three years from the date
of a request to the Authority by any of its members to
adopt such rules, regulations and procedures in respect
of such resource. All rules, regulations and procedures
shall remain in effect on a provisional basis until approved
by the Assembly or until amended by the Council in the
light of any views expressed by the Assembly;
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 15 AND 16
15. The Authority shall elaborate and adopt, in accordance
with article 162, paragraph 2 (o) (ii), of the Convention,
rules, regulations and procedures based on the principles
contained in sections 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this Annex, as well as
52

[Page 53]
any additional rules, regulations and procedures necessary
to facilitate the approval of plans of work for exploration
or exploitation, in accordance with the following
subparagraphs:
(a) The Council may undertake such elaboration any time
it deems that all or any of such rules, regulations or
procedures are required for the conduct of activities
in the Area, or when it determines that commercial
exploitation is imminent, or at the request of a State
whose national intends to apply for approval of a plan
of work for exploitation;
(b) If a request is made by a State referred to in
subparagraph (a) the Council shall, in accordance
with article 162, paragraph 2 (o), of the Convention,
complete the adoption of such rules, regulations and
procedures within two years of the request;
(c) If the Council has not completed the elaboration
of the rules, regulations and procedures relating
to exploitation within the prescribed time and
an application for approval of a plan of work for
exploitation is pending, it shall none the less consider
and provisionally approve such plan of work based
on the provisions of the Convention and any rules,
regulations and procedures that the Council may
have adopted provisionally, or on the basis of the
norms contained in the Convention and the terms
and principles contained in this Annex as well as the
principle of non-discrimination among contractors.
16. The draft rules, regulations and procedures and any
recommendations relating to the provisions of Part XI,
as contained in the reports and recommendations of the
Preparatory Commission, shall be taken into account by
the Authority in the adoption of rules, regulations and
procedures in accordance with Part XI and this Agreement.
(p) review the collection of all payments to be made by or to the
Authority in connection with operations pursuant to this Part;
[(q) Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 6, paragraph 7]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 6, PARAGRAPH 7
7. The provisions of … article 162, paragraph 2 (q) … of the
Convention shall not apply.
53

[Page 54]
(r) submit the proposed annual budget of the Authority to the
Assembly for its approval;
(s) make recommendations to the Assembly concerning policies on
any question or matter within the competence of the Authority;
(t) make recommendations to the Assembly concerning
suspension of the exercise of the rights and privileges of
membership pursuant to article 185;
(u) institute proceedings on behalf of the Authority before the
Seabed Disputes Chamber in cases of non-compliance;
(v) notify the Assembly upon a decision by the Seabed Disputes
Chamber in proceedings instituted under subparagraph (u),
and make any recommendations which it may find appropriate
with respect to measures to be taken;
(w) issue emergency orders, which may include orders for the
suspension or adjustment of operations, to prevent serious
harm to the marine environment arising out of activities in the
Area;
(x) disapprove areas for exploitation by contractors or the Enterprise
in cases where substantial evidence indicates the risk of serious
harm to the marine environment;
(y) establish a subsidiary organ for the elaboration of draft financial
rules, regulations and procedures relating to:
(i) financial management in accordance with articles 171 to
175; and
(ii) financial arrangements in accordance with Annex III,
article 13 and article 17, paragraph 1(c);
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 9, PARAGRAPH 9
9. The requirement of article 162, paragraph 2 (y), of the
Convention to establish a subsidiary organ to deal with
financial matters shall be deemed to have been fulfilled by
the establishment of the Finance Committee in accordance
with this section.
(z) establish appropriate mechanisms for directing and supervising
a staff of inspectors who shall inspect activities in the Area
to determine whether this Part, the rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority, and the terms and conditions of
any contract with the Authority are being complied with.
54

[Page 55]
Note: The relevant provisions of article 162 which, pursuant
to section 3, paragraph 11(b) and section 6, paragraph
7 of the annex to the Agreement, shall not apply,
formerly read as follows:
2. …
(i) if the Commission recommends the approval of a plan
of work, it shall be deemed to have been approved by the
Council if no member of the Council submits in writing
to the President within 14 days a specific objection
alleging non-compliance with the requirements of
Annex III, article 6. If there is an objection, the conciliation
procedure set forth in article 161, paragraph 8(e) shall
apply. If at the end of the conciliation procedure, the
objection is still maintained, the plan of work shall be
deemed to have been approved by the Council unless
the Council disapproves it by consensus among its
members excluding any State or States making the
application or sponsoring the applicant;
(ii) if the Commission recommends the disapproval of a
plan of work or does not make a recommendation,
the Council may approve the plan of work by a
three-fourths majority of the members present
and voting, provided that such majority includes
a majority of the members participating in the
session;
(j) approve plans of work in accordance with Annex III,
article 6. The Council shall act upon each plan of
work within 60 days of its submission by the Legal and
Technical Commission at a session of the Council in
accordance with the following procedures:
…
(q) make the selection from among applicants for
production authorizations pursuant to Annex III, article
7, where such selection is required by that provision;
Article 163
Organs of the Council
1. There are hereby established the following organs of the Council:
(a) an Economic Planning Commission;
55

[Page 56]
(b) a Legal and Technical Commission.
2. Each Commission shall be composed of 15 members, elected by the
Council from among the candidates nominated by the States Parties.
However, if necessary, the Council may decide to increase the size of
either Commission having due regard to economy and efficiency.
3. Members of a Commission shall have appropriate qualifications in
the area of competence of that Commission. States Parties shall
nominate candidates of the highest standards of competence and
integrity with qualifications in relevant fields so as to ensure the
effective exercise of the functions of the Commissions.
4. In the election of members of the Commissions, due account shall
be taken of the need for equitable geographical distribution and the
representation of special interests.
5. No State Party may nominate more than one candidate for the same
Commission. No person shall be elected to serve on more than one
Commission.
6. Members of the Commissions shall hold office for a term of five years.
They shall be eligible for re-election for a further term.
7. In the event of the death, incapacity or resignation of a member of a
Commission prior to the expiration of the term of office, the Council
shall elect for the remainder of the term, a member from the same
geographical region or area of interest.
8. Members of Commissions shall have no financial interest in any
activity relating to exploration and exploitation in the Area. Subject
to their responsibilities to the Commissions upon which they serve,
they shall not disclose, even after the termination of their functions,
any industrial secret, proprietary data which are transferred to
the Authority in accordance with Annex III, article 14, or any other
confidential information coming to their knowledge by reason of
their duties for the Authority.
9. Each Commission shall exercise its functions in accordance with such
guidelines and directives as the Council may adopt.
10. Each Commission shall formulate and submit to the Council for
approval such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
efficient conduct of the Commission’s functions.
11. The decision-making procedures of the Commissions shall be
established by the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Authority. Recommendations to the Council shall, where necessary,
be accompanied by a summary on the divergencies of opinion in the
Commission.
56

[Page 57]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPHS 2 AND 13
2. As a general rule, decision-making in the organs of the
Authority should be by consensus.
…
13. Decisions by voting in the Legal and Technical Commission
shall be by a majority of members present and voting.
12. Each Commission shall normally function at the seat of the Authority
and shall meet as often as is required for the efficient exercise of its
functions.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 2 AND 3
2. In order to minimize costs to States Parties, all organs and
subsidiary bodies to be established under the Convention
and this Agreement shall be cost-effective. This principle
shall also apply to the frequency, duration and scheduling
of meetings.
3. The setting up and the functioning of the organs and
subsidiary bodies of the Authority shall be based on an
evolutionary approach, taking into account the functional
needs of the organs and subsidiary bodies concerned in
order that they may discharge effectively their respective
responsibilities at various stages of the development of
activities in the Area.
13. In the exercise of its functions, each Commission may, where
appropriate, consult another commission, any competent organ of
the United Nations or of its specialized agencies or any international
organizations with competence in the subject-matter of such
consultation.
Article 164
The Economic Planning Commission
1. Members of the Economic Planning Commission shall have
appropriate qualifications such as those relevant to mining,
management of mineral resource activities, international trade or
international economics. The Council shall endeavour to ensure
that the membership of the Commission reflects all appropriate
qualifications. The Commission shall include at least two members
57

[Page 58]
from developing States whose exports of the categories of minerals
to be derived from the Area have a substantial bearing upon their
economies.
2. The Commission shall:
(a) propose, upon the request of the Council, measures to
implement decisions relating to activities in the Area taken in
accordance with this Convention;
(b) review the trends of and the factors affecting supply, demand
and prices of minerals which may be derived from the Area,
bearing in mind the interests of both importing and exporting
countries, and in particular of the developing States among
them;
(c) examine any situation likely to lead to the adverse effects
referred to in article 150, subparagraph (h), brought to its
attention by the State Party or States Parties concerned, and
make appropriate recommendations to the Council;
(d) propose to the Council for submission to the Assembly,
as provided in article 151, paragraph 10, a system of
compensation or other measures of economic adjustment
assistance for developing States which suffer adverse effects
caused by activities in the Area. The Commission shall make
the recommendations to the Council that are necessary for the
application of the system or other measures adopted by the
Assembly in specific cases.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPH 4
4. ... The functions of the Economic Planning Commission
shall be performed by the Legal and Technical Commission
until such time as the Council decides otherwise or until the
approval of the first plan of work for exploitation.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 7, PARAGRAPH 2
2. Article 151, paragraph 10, of the Convention shall be
implemented by means of measures of economic assistance
referred to in paragraph 1. … article 164, paragraph 2 (d) …
of the Convention shall be interpreted accordingly.
58

[Page 59]
Article 165
The Legal and Technical Commission
1. Members of the Legal and Technical Commission shall have
appropriate qualifications such as those relevant to exploration for
and exploitation and processing of mineral resources, oceanology,
protection of the marine environment, or economic or legal matters
relating to ocean mining and related fields of expertise. The Council
shall endeavour to ensure that the membership of the Commission
reflects all appropriate qualifications.
2. The Commission shall:
(a) make recommendations with regard to the exercise of the
Authority’s functions upon the request of the Council;
(b) review formal written plans of work for activities in the Area
in accordance with article 153, paragraph 3, and submit
appropriate recommendations to the Council. The Commission
shall base its recommendations solely on the grounds stated in
Annex III and shall report fully thereon to the Council;
(c) supervise, upon the request of the Council, activities in the Area,
where appropriate, in consultation and collaboration with any
entity carrying out such activities or State or States concerned
and report to the Council;
(d) prepare assessments of the environmental implications of
activities in the Area;
(e) make recommendations to the Council on the protection of
the marine environment, taking into account the views of
recognized experts in that field;
(f) formulate and submit to the Council the rules, regulations and
procedures referred to in article 162, paragraph 2(o), taking
into account all relevant factors including assessments of the
environmental implications of activities in the Area;
(g) keep such rules, regulations and procedures under review and
recommend to the Council from time to time such amendments
thereto as it may deem necessary or desirable;
(h) make recommendations to the Council regarding the
establishment of a monitoring programme to observe, measure,
evaluate and analyse, by recognized scientific methods, on
a regular basis, the risks or effects of pollution of the marine
environment resulting from activities in the Area, ensure that
existing regulations are adequate and are complied with and
coordinate the implementation of the monitoring programme
approved by the Council;
59

[Page 60]
(i) recommend to the Council that proceedings be instituted on
behalf of the Authority before the Seabed Disputes Chamber, in
accordance with this Part and the relevant Annexes taking into
account particularly article 187;
(j) make recommendations to the Council with respect to measures
to be taken, upon a decision by the Seabed Disputes Chamber
in proceedings instituted in accordance with subparagraph (i);
(k) make recommendations to the Council to issue emergency
orders, which may include orders for the suspension or
adjustment of operations, to prevent serious harm to the
marine environment arising out of activities in the Area. Such
recommendations shall be taken up by the Council on a priority
basis;
(l) make recommendations to the Council to disapprove areas for
exploitation by contractors or the Enterprise in cases where
substantial evidence indicates the risk of serious harm to the
marine environment;
(m) make recommendations to the Council regarding the direction
and supervision of a staff of inspectors who shall inspect
activities in the Area to determine whether the provisions of
this Part, the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority,
and the terms and conditions of any contract with the Authority
are being complied with;
[(n) Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 6, paragraph 7]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 6, PARAGRAPH 7
7. The provisions of … article 165, paragraph 2 (n) … of the
Convention shall not apply.
3. The members of the Commission shall, upon request by any State
Party or other party concerned, be accompanied by a representative
of such State or other party concerned when carrying out their
function of supervision and inspection.
Note: The relevant provisions of article 165 which, pursuant to
section 6, paragraph 7, of the annex to the Agreement,
shall not apply, formerly read as follows:
2. …
(n) calculate the production ceiling and issue production
authorizations on behalf of the Authority pursuant
60

[Page 61]
to article 151, paragraphs 2 to 7, following any
necessary selection among applicants for production
authorizations by the Council in accordance with
Annex III, article 7.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 9
SECTION 9. THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
1. There is hereby established a Finance Committee. The
Committee shall be composed of 15 members with
appropriate qualifications relevant to financial matters.
States Parties shall nominate candidates of the highest
standards of competence and integrity.
2. No two members of the Finance Committee shall be
nationals of the same State Party.
3. Members of the Finance Committee shall be elected by the
Assembly and due account shall be taken of the need for
equitable geographical distribution and the representation
of special interests. Each group of States referred to in
section 3, paragraph 15 (a), (b), (c) and (d), of this Annex
shall be represented on the Committee by at least one
member. Until the Authority has sufficient funds other
than assessed contributions to meet its administrative
expenses, the membership of the Committee shall include
representatives of the five largest financial contributors
to the administrative budget of the Authority. Thereafter,
the election of one member from each group shall be on
the basis of nomination by the members of the respective
group, without prejudice to the possibility of further
members being elected from each group.
4. Members of the Finance Committee shall hold office for a
term of five years. They shall be eligible for re-election for a
further term.
5. In the event of the death, incapacity or resignation of a
member of the Finance Committee prior to the expiration of
the term of office, the Assembly shall elect for the remainder
of the term a member from the same geographical region or
group of States.
6. Members of the Finance Committee shall have no
financial interest in any activity relating to matters upon
which the Committee has the responsibility to make
recommendations. They shall not disclose, even after the
61

[Page 62]
termination of their functions, any confidential information
coming to their knowledge by reason of their duties for the
Authority.
7. Decisions by the Assembly and the Council on the following
issues shall take into account recommendations of the
Finance Committee:
(a) Draft financial rules, regulations and procedures of the
organs of the Authority and the financial management
and internal financial administration of the Authority;
(b) Assessment of contributions of members to the
administrative budget of the Authority in accordance
with article 160, paragraph 2(e), of the Convention;
(c) All relevant financial matters, including the proposed
annual budget prepared by the Secretary-General
of the Authority in accordance with article 172 of
the Convention and the financial aspects of the
implementation of the programmes of work of the
Secretariat;
(d) The administrative budget;
(e) Financial obligations of States Parties arising from
the implementation of this Agreement and Part XI as
well as the administrative and budgetary implications
of proposals and recommendations involving
expenditure from the funds of the Authority;
(f) Rules, regulations and procedures on the equitable
sharing of financial and other economic benefits
derived from activities in the Area and the decisions to
be made thereon.
8. Decisions in the Finance Committee on questions of
procedure shall be taken by a majority of members present
and voting. Decisions on questions of substance shall be
taken by consensus.
9. The requirement of article 162, paragraph 2(y), of the
Convention to establish a subsidiary organ to deal with
financial matters shall be deemed to have been fulfilled by
the establishment of the Finance Committee in accordance
with this section.
62

[Page 63]
SUBSECTION D. THE SECRETARIAT
Article 166
The Secretariat
1. The Secretariat of the Authority shall comprise a Secretary-General
and such staff as the Authority may require.
2. The Secretary-General shall be elected for four years by the Assembly
from among the candidates proposed by the Council and may be re-
elected.
3. The Secretary-General shall be the chief administrative officer of
the Authority, and shall act in that capacity in all meetings of the
Assembly, of the Council and of any subsidiary organ, and shall
perform such other administrative functions as are entrusted to the
Secretary-General by these organs.
4. The Secretary-General shall make an annual report to the Assembly
on the work of the Authority.
Article 167
The staff of the Authority
1. The Staff of the Authority shall consist of such qualified scientific
and technical and other personnel as may be required to fulfil the
administrative functions of the Authority.
2. The paramount consideration in the recruitment and employment
of the staff and in the determination of their conditions of service
shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity. Subject to this consideration, due regard
shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a
geographical basis as possible.
3. The staff shall be appointed by the Secretary-General. The terms
and conditions on which they shall be appointed, remunerated and
dismissed shall be in accordance with the rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority.
Article 168
International character of the Secretariat
1. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the
staff shall not seek or receive instructions from any government or
from other source external to the Authority. They shall refrain from
any action which might reflect on their position as international
63

[Page 64]
officials responsible only to the Authority. Each State Party
undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the
responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff and not to
seek to influence them in the discharge of their responsibilities. Any
violation of responsibilities by a staff member shall be submitted
to the appropriate administrative tribunal as provided in the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority.
2. The Secretary-General and the staff shall have no financial interest
in any activity relating to exploration and exploitation in the Area.
Subject to their responsibilities to the Authority, they shall not
disclose, even after the termination of their functions, any industrial
secret, proprietary data which are transferred to the Authority
in accordance with Annex III, article 14, or any other confidential
information coming to their knowledge by reason of their
employment with the Authority.
3. Violations of the obligations of a staff member of the Authority set
forth in paragraph 2 shall, on the request of a State Party affected by
such violation, or a natural or juridical person, sponsored by a State
Party as provided in article 153, paragraph 2(b), and affected by such
violation, be submitted by the Authority against the staff member
concerned to a tribunal designated by the rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority. The Party affected shall have the right
to take part in the proceedings. If the tribunal so recommends, the
Secretary-General shall dismiss the staff member concerned.
4. The rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority shall contain
such provisions as are necessary to implement this article.
Article 169
Consultation and cooperation with international and non-governmental
organizations
1. The Secretary-General shall, on matters within the competence of
the Authority, make suitable arrangements, with the approval of the
Council, for consultation and cooperation with international and
non-governmental organizations recognized by the Economic and
Social Council of the United Nations.
2. Any organization with which the Secretary-General has entered into
an arrangement under paragraph 1 may designate representatives
to attend meetings of the organs of the Authority as observers in
accordance with the rules of procedure of these organs. Procedures
shall be established for obtaining the views of such organizations in
appropriate cases.
64

[Page 65]
3. The Secretary-General may distribute to States Parties written
reports submitted by the non-governmental organizations referred
to in paragraph 1 on subjects in which they have special competence
and which are related to the work of the Authority.
SUBSECTION E. THE ENTERPRISE
Article 170
The Enterprise
1. The Enterprise shall be the organ of the Authority which shall carry
out activities in the Area directly, pursuant to article 153, paragraph
2(a), as well as the transporting, processing and marketing of minerals
recovered from the Area.
2. The Enterprise shall, within the framework of the international legal
personality of the Authority, have such legal capacity as is provided
for in the Statute set forth in Annex IV. The Enterprise shall act in
accordance with this Convention and the rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority, as well as the general policies established
by the Assembly, and shall be subject to the directives and control of
the Council.
3. The Enterprise shall have its principal place of business at the seat of
the Authority.
4. The Enterprise shall in accordance with article 173, paragraph 2, and
Annex IV, article 11, be provided with such funds as it may require to
carry out its functions, and shall receive technology as provided in
article 144 and other relevant provisions of this Convention.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 2 AND 3
2. In order to minimize costs to States Parties, all organs
and subsidiary bodies to be established under the
Convention and this Agreement shall be cost-effective.
This principle shall also apply to the frequency,
duration and scheduling of meetings.
3. The setting up and the functioning of the organs and
subsidiary bodies of the Authority shall be based on
an evolutionary approach, taking into account the
functional needs of the organs and subsidiary bodies
concerned in order that they may discharge effectively
their respective responsibilities at various stages of
the development of activities in the Area.
65

[Page 66]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 2
SECTION 2. THE ENTERPRISE
1. The Secretariat of the Authority shall perform the functions
of the Enterprise until it begins to operate independently of
the Secretariat. The Secretary-General of the Authority shall
appoint from within the staff of the Authority an interim
Director-General to oversee the performance of these
functions by the Secretariat.
These functions shall be:
(a) Monitoring and review of trends and developments
relating to deep seabed mining activities, including
regular analysis of world metal market conditions and
metal prices, trends and prospects;
(b) Assessment of the results of the conduct of marine
scientific research with respect to activities in the Area,
with particular emphasis on research related to the
environmental impact of activities in the Area;
(c) Assessment of available data relating to prospecting
and exploration, including the criteria for such
activities;
(d) Assessment of technological developments relevant to
activities in the Area, in particular technology relating
to the protection and preservation of the marine
environment;
(e) Evaluation of information and data relating to areas
reserved for the Authority;
(f) Assessment of approaches to joint-venture operations;
(g) Collection of information on the availability of trained
manpower;
(h) Study of managerial policy options for the
administration of the Enterprise at different stages of
its operations.
2. The Enterprise shall conduct its initial deep seabed mining
operations through joint ventures. Upon the approval of
a plan of work for exploitation for an entity other than the
Enterprise, or upon receipt by the Council of an application
for a joint-venture operation with the Enterprise, the Council
shall take up the issue of the functioning of the Enterprise
independently of the Secretariat of the Authority. If joint-
venture operations with the Enterprise accord with sound
66

[Page 67]
commercial principles, the Council shall issue a directive
pursuant to article 170, paragraph 2, of the Convention
providing for such independent functioning.
3. The obligation of States Parties to fund one mine site of the
Enterprise as provided for in Annex IV, article 11, paragraph
3, of the Convention shall not apply and States Parties shall
be under no obligation to finance any of the operations in
any mine site of the Enterprise or under its joint-venture
arrangements.
4. The obligations applicable to contractors shall apply to
the Enterprise. Notwithstanding the provisions of article
153, paragraph 3, and Annex III, article 3, paragraph 5, of
the Convention, a plan of work for the Enterprise upon
its approval shall be in the form of a contract concluded
between the Authority and the Enterprise.
5. A contractor which has contributed a particular area to the
Authority as a reserved area has the right of first refusal to
enter into a joint-venture arrangement with the Enterprise
for exploration and exploitation of that area. If the
Enterprise does not submit an application for a plan of work
for activities in respect of such a reserved area within 15
years of the commencement of its functions independent
of the Secretariat of the Authority or within 15 years of
the date on which that area is reserved for the Authority,
whichever is the later, the contractor which contributed the
area shall be entitled to apply for a plan of work for that area
provided it offers in good faith to include the Enterprise as a
joint-venture partner.
6. Article 170, paragraph 4, Annex IV and other provisions
of the Convention relating to the Enterprise shall be
interpreted and applied in accordance with this section.
SUBSECTION F. FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS OF THE AUTHORITY
Article 171
Funds of the Authority
The funds of the Authority shall include:
(a) assessed contributions made by members of the Authority in
accordance with article 160, paragraph 2(e);
(b) funds received by the Authority pursuant to Annex III, article 13,
in connection with activities in the Area;
67

[Page 68]
(c) funds transferred from the Enterprise in accordance with Annex
IV, article 10;
(d) funds borrowed pursuant to article 174;
(e) voluntary contributions made by members or other entities;
and
(f) payments to a compensation fund, in accordance with article
151, paragraph 10, whose sources are to be recommended by
the Economic Planning Commission.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 7, PARAGRAPH 2
2. Article 151, paragraph 10, of the Convention shall be
implemented by means of measures of economic assistance
referred to in paragraph 1. … article 171, subparagraph (f)
… of the Convention shall be interpreted accordingly.
Article 172
Annual budget of the Authority
The Secretary-General shall draft the proposed annual budget of the
Authority and submit it to the Council. The Council shall consider the
proposed annual budget and submit it to the Assembly, together with
any recommendations thereon. The Assembly shall consider and approve
the proposed annual budget in accordance with article 160, paragraph
2(h).
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPH 14
14. The Authority shall have its own budget. Until the end of
the year following the year during which this Agreement
enters into force, the administrative expenses of the
Authority shall be met through the budget of the United
Nations. Thereafter, the administrative expenses of the
Authority shall be met by assessed contributions of its
members, including any members on a provisional basis, in
accordance with articles 171, subparagraph (a), and 173 of
the Convention and this Agreement, until the Authority has
sufficient funds from other sources to meet those expenses.
The Authority shall not exercise the power referred to in
article 174, paragraph 1, of the Convention to borrow funds
to finance its administrative budget.
68

[Page 69]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 9, PARAGRAPH 7
7. Decisions by the Assembly and the Council on the following
issues shall take into account recommendations of the
Finance Committee:
…
(c) All relevant financial matters, including the proposed
anual budget prepared by the Secretary-General of the
Authority in accordance with article 172 of the Conven-
tion and the financial aspects of the implementation of
the programmes of work of the Secretariat;
(d) The administrative budget;
…
Article 173
Expenses of the Authority
1. The contributions referred to in article 171, subparagraph (a), shall
be paid into a special account to meet the administrative expenses
of the Authority until the Authority has sufficient funds from other
sources to meet those expenses.
2. The administrative expenses of the Authority shall be a first call upon
the funds of the Authority. Except for the assessed contributions
referred to in article 171, subparagraph (a), the funds which remain
after payment of administrative expenses may, inter alia:
(a) be shared in accordance with article 140 and article 160,
paragraph 2(g);
(b) be used to provide the Enterprise with funds in accordance with
article 170, paragraph 4;
(c) be used to compensate developing States in accordance with
article 151, paragraph 10, and article 160, paragraph 2(1).
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 7, PARAGRAPH 2
2. Article 151, paragraph 10, of the Convention shall be
implemented by means of measures of economic assistance
referred to in paragraph 1. … article 173, paragraph 2 (c), of
the Convention shall be interpreted accordingly.
69

[Page 70]
Article 174
Borrowing power of the Authority
1. The Authority shall have the power to borrow funds.
2. The Assembly shall prescribe the limits on the borrowing power of
the Authority in the financial regulations adopted pursuant to article
160, paragraph 2(f).
3. The Council shall exercise the borrowing power of the Authority.
4. States Parties shall not be liable for the debts of the Authority.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPH 14
14. … The Authority shall not exercise the power referred to in
article 174, paragraph 1, of the Convention to borrow funds
to finance its administrative budget.
Article 175
Annual audit
The records, books and accounts of the Authority, including its annual
financial statements, shall be audited annually by an independent auditor
appointed by the Assembly.
SUBSECTION G. LEGAL STATUS, PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
Article 176
Legal status
The Authority shall have international legal personality and such legal
capacity as may be necessary for the exercise of its functions and the
fulfilment of its purposes.
Article 177
Privileges and immunities
To enable the Authority to exercise its functions, it shall enjoy in the
territory of each State Party the privileges and immunities set forth in this
subsection. The privileges and immunities relating to the Enterprise shall
be those set forth in Annex IV, article 13.
70

[Page 71]
Article 178
Immunity from legal process
The Authority, its property and assets, shall enjoy immunity from legal
process except to the extent that the Authority expressly waives this
immunity in a particular case.
Article 179
Immunity from search and any form of seizure
The property and assets of the Authority, wherever located and by
whomsoever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation,
expropriation or any other form of seizure by executive or legislative
action.
Article 180
Exemption from restrictions, regulations, controls and moratoria
The property and assets of the Authority shall be exempt from
restrictions, regulations, controls and moratoria of any nature.
Article 181
Archives and official communications of the Authority
1. The archives of the Authority, wherever located, shall be inviolable.
2. Proprietary data, industrial secrets or similar information and
personnel records shall not be placed in archives which are open to
public inspection.
3. With regard to its official communications, the Authority shall be
accorded by each State Party treatment no less favourable than that
accorded by that State to other international organizations.
Article 182
Privileges and immunities of certain persons connected with the Authority
Representatives of States Parties attending meetings of the Assembly,
the Council or organs of the Assembly or the Council, and the Secretary-
General and staff of the Authority, shall enjoy in the territory of each State
Party:
(a) immunity from legal process with respect to acts performed by
them in the exercise of their functions, except to the extent that
the State which they represent or the Authority, as appropriate,
71

[Page 72]
expressly waives this immunity in a particular case;
(b) if they are not nationals of that State Party, the same exemptions
from immigration restrictions, alien registration requirements
and national service obligations, the same facilities as regards
exchange restrictions and the same treatment in respect
of travelling facilities as are accorded by that State to the
representatives, officials and employees of comparable rank of
other States Parties.
Article 183
Exemption from taxes and customs duties
1. Within the scope of its official activities, the Authority its assets and
property, its income, and its operations and transactions, authorized
by this Convention, shall be exempt from all direct taxation and
goods imported or exported for its official use shall be exempt from
all customs duties. The Authority shall not claim exemption from
taxes which are no more than charges for services rendered.
2. When purchases of goods or services of substantial value necessary
for the official activities of the Authority are made by or on behalf
of the Authority, and when the price of such goods or services
includes taxes or duties, appropriate measures shall, to the extent
practicable, be taken by States Parties to grant exemption from such
taxes or duties or provide for their reimbursement. Goods imported
or purchased under an exemption provided for in this article shall
not be sold or otherwise disposed of in the territory of the State Party
which granted the exemption, except under conditions agreed with
that State Party.
3. No tax shall be levied by States Parties on or in respect of salaries
and emoluments paid or any other form of payment made by the
Authority to the Secretary-General and staff of the Authority, as well
as experts performing missions for the Authority, who are not their
nationals.
SUBSECTION H. SUSPENSION OF THE EXERCISE OF RIGHTS AND
PRIVILEGES OF MEMBERS
Article 184
Suspension of the exercise of voting rights
A State Party which is in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Authority shall have no vote if the amount of its
72

[Page 73]
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it
for the preceding two full years. The Assembly may, nevertheless, permit
such a member to vote if it is satisfied that the failure to pay is due to
conditions beyond the control of the member.
Article 185
Suspension of exercise of rights and privileges of membership
1. A State Party which has grossly and persistently violated the
provisions of this Part may be suspended from the exercise of the
rights and privileges of membership by the Assembly upon the
recommendation of the Council.
2. No action may be taken under paragraph 1 until the Seabed Disputes
Chamber has found that a State Party has grossly and persistently
violated the provisions of this Part.
SECTION 5. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES AND ADVISORY OPINIONS
Article 186
Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
The establishment of the Seabed Disputes Chamber and the manner in
which it shall exercise its jurisdiction shall be governed by the provisions
of this section, of Part XV and of Annex VI.
Article 187
Jurisdiction of the Seabed Disputes Chamber
The Seabed Disputes Chamber shall have jurisdiction under this Part
and the Annexes relating thereto in disputes with respect to activities in
the Area falling within the following categories:
(a) disputes between States Parties concerning the interpretation
or application of this Part and the Annexes relating thereto;
(b) disputes between a State Party and the Authority concerning:
(i) acts or omissions of the Authority or of a State Party
alleged to be in violation of this Part or the Annexes
relating thereto or of rules, regulations and procedures of
the Authority adopted in accordance therewith; or
(ii) acts of the Authority alleged to be in excess of jurisdiction
or a misuse of power;
(c) disputes between parties to a contract, being States Parties,
the Authority or the Enterprise, state enterprises and natural
73

[Page 74]
or juridical persons referred to in article 153, paragraph 2(b),
concerning:
(i) the interpretation or application of a relevant contract or
a plan of work; or
(ii) acts or omissions of a party to the contract relating to
activities in the Area and directed to the other party or
directly affecting its legitimate interests;
(d) disputes between the Authority and a prospective contractor
who has been sponsored by a State as provided in article 153,
paragraph 2 (b), and has duly fulfilled the conditions referred to
in Annex III, article 4, paragraph 6, and article 13, paragraph 2,
concerning the refusal of a contract or a legal issue arising in the
negotiation of the contract;
(e) disputes between the Authority and a State Party, a state
enterprise or a natural or juridical person sponsored by a State
Party as provided for in article 153, paragraph 2(b), where it is
alleged that the Authority has incurred liability as provided in
Annex III, article 22;
(f) any other disputes for which the jurisdiction of the Chamber is
specifically provided in this Convention.
Article 188
Submission of disputes to a special chamber of the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea or an ad hoc chamber of the Seabed Disputes Chamber or
to binding commercial arbitration
1. Disputes between States Parties referred to in article 187,
subparagraph (a), may be submitted:
(a) at the request of the parties to the dispute, to a special chamber
of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea to be formed
in accordance with Annex VI, articles 15 and 17; or
(b) at the request of any party to the dispute, to an ad hoc chamber
of the Seabed Disputes Chamber to be formed in accordance
with Annex VI, article 36.
2. (a) Disputes concerning the interpretation or application of a contract
referred to in article 187, subparagraph (c)(i), shall be submitted,
at the request of any party to the dispute, to binding commercial
arbitration, unless the parties otherwise agree. A commercial
arbitral tribunal to which the dispute is submitted shall have
no jurisdiction to decide any question of interpretation of this
Convention. When the dispute also involves a question of the
interpretation of Part XI and the Annexes relating thereto, with
74

[Page 75]
respect to activities in the Area, that question shall be referred
to the Seabed Disputes Chamber for a ruling.
(b) If, at the commencement of or in the course of such arbitration,
the arbitral tribunal determines, either at the request of any party
to the dispute or proprio motu, that its decision depends upon
a ruling of the Seabed Disputes Chamber, the arbitral tribunal
shall refer such question to the Seabed Disputes Chamber for
such ruling. The arbitral tribunal shall then proceed to render
its award in conformity with the ruling of the Seabed Disputes
Chamber.
(c) In the absence of a provision in the contract on the arbitration
procedure to be applied in the dispute, the arbitration shall be
conducted in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
or such other arbitration rules as may be prescribed in the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority, unless the parties
to the dispute otherwise agree.
Article 189
Limitation on jurisdiction with regard to decisions of the Authority
The Seabed Disputes Chamber shall have no jurisdiction with regard
to the exercise by the Authority of its discretionary powers in accordance
with this Part; in no case shall it substitute its discretion for that of the
Authority. Without prejudice to article 191, in exercising its jurisdiction
pursuant to article 187, the Seabed Disputes Chamber shall not pronounce
itself on the question of whether any rules, regulations and procedures of
the Authority are in conformity with this Convention, nor declare invalid
any such rules, regulations and procedures. Its jurisdiction in this regard
shall be confined to deciding claims that the application of any rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority in individual cases would be
in conflict with the contractual obligations of the parties to the dispute
or their obligations under this Convention, claims concerning excess of
jurisdiction or misuse of power, and to claims for damages to be paid or
other remedy to be given to the party concerned for the failure of the
other party to comply with its contractual obligations or its obligations
under this Convention.
Article 190
Participation and appearance of sponsoring States Parties in proceedings
1. If a natural or juridical person is a party to a dispute referred to in
article 187, the sponsoring State shall be given notice thereof and
75

[Page 76]
shall have the right to participate in the proceedings by submitting
written or oral statements.
2. If an action is brought against a State Party by a natural or juridical
person sponsored by another State Party in a dispute referred to in
article 187, subparagraph (c), the respondent State may request the
State sponsoring that person to appear in the proceedings on behalf
of that person. Failing such appearance, the respondent State may
arrange to be represented by a juridical person of its nationality.
Article 191
Advisory opinions
The Seabed Disputes Chamber shall give advisory opinions at the
request of the Assembly or the Council on legal questions arising within
the scope of their activities. Such opinions shall be given as a matter of
urgency.
…
Article 314
Amendments to the provisions of this Convention relating exclusively to
activities in the Area
1. A State Party may, by written communication addressed to the
Secretary-General of the Authority, propose an amendment to the
provisions of this Convention relating exclusively to activities in the
Area, including Annex VI, section 4. The Secretary-General shall
circulate such communication to all States Parties. The proposed
amendment shall be subject to approval by the Assembly following
its approval by the Council. Representatives of States Parties in those
organs shall have full powers to consider and approve the proposed
amendment. The proposed amendment as approved by the Council
and the Assembly shall be considered adopted.
2. Before approving any amendment under paragraph 1, the Council
and the Assembly shall ensure that it does not prejudice the system
of exploration for and exploitation of the resources of the Area,
pending the Review Conference in accordance with article 155.
76

[Page 77]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 4
SECTION 4. REVIEW CONFERENCE
… Notwithstanding the provisions of article 314, paragraph
2, of the Convention, the Assembly, on the recommendation of
the Council, may undertake at any time a review of the matters
referred to in article 155, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
Amendments relating to this Agreement and Part XI shall be
subject to the procedures contained in articles 314, 315 and
316 of the Convention, provided that the principles, regime
and other terms referred to in article 155, paragraph 2, of the
Convention shall be maintained and the rights referred to in
paragraph 5 of that article shall not be affected.
77

[Page 78]
ANNEX III
BASIC CONDITIONS OF PROSPECTING, EXPLORATION
AND EXPLOITATION
Article 1
Title to minerals
Title to minerals shall pass upon recovery in accordance with this
Convention.
Article 2
Prospecting
1. (a) The Authority shall encourage prospecting in the Area.
(b) Prospecting shall be conducted only after the Authority has
received a satisfactory written undertaking that the proposed
prospector will comply with this Convention and the relevant
rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority concerning
cooperation in the training programmes referred to in articles
143 and 144 and the protection of the marine environment,
and will accept verification by the Authority of compliance
therewith. The proposed prospector shall, at the same time,
notify the Authority of the approximate area or areas in which
prospecting is to be conducted.
(c) Prospecting may be conducted simultaneously by more than
one prospector in the same area or areas.
2. Prospecting shall not confer on the prospector any rights with respect
to resources. A prospector may, however, recover a reasonable
quantity of minerals to be used for testing.
Article 3
Exploration and exploitation
1. The Enterprise, States Parties, and the other entities referred to in
article 153, paragraph 2(b), may apply to the Authority for approval
of plans of work for activities in the Area.
2. The Enterprise may apply with respect to any part of the Area, but
applications by others with respect to reserved areas are subject to
the additional requirements of article 9 of this Annex.
78

[Page 79]
3. Exploration and exploitation shall be carried out only in areas
specified in plans of work referred to in article 153, paragraph 3, and
approved by the Authority in accordance with this Convention and
the relevant rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority.
4. Every approved plan of work shall:
(a) be in conformity with this Convention and the rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority;
(b) provide for control by the Authority of activities in the Area in
accordance with article 153, paragraph 4;
(c) confer on the operator, in accordance with the rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority, the exclusive right to explore
for and exploit the specified categories of resources in the
area covered by the plan of work. If, however, the applicant
presents for approval a plan of work covering only the stage of
exploration or the stage of exploitation, the approved plan of
work shall confer such exclusive right with respect to that stage
only.
5. Upon its approval by the Authority, every plan of work, except
those presented by the Enterprise, shall be in the form of a contract
concluded between the Authority and the applicant or applicants.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 2, PARAGRAPH 4
4. … Notwithstanding the provisions of article 153, paragraph
3, and Annex III, article 3, paragraph 5, of the Convention, a
plan of work for the Enterprise upon its approval shall be in
the form of a contract concluded between the Authority and
the Enterprise.
Article 4
Qualifications of applicants
1. Applicants, other than the Enterprise, shall be qualified if they
have the nationality or control and sponsorship required by article
153, paragraph 2(b), and if they follow the procedures and meet
the qualification standards set forth in the rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority.
2. Except as provided in paragraph 6, such qualification standards shall
relate to the financial and technical capabilities of the applicant and
his performance under any previous contracts with the Authority.
3. Each applicant shall be sponsored by the State Party of which it is a
national unless the applicant has more than one nationality, as in the
79

[Page 80]
case of a partnership or consortium of entities from several States, in
which event all States Parties involved shall sponsor the application,
or unless the applicant is effectively controlled by another State Party
or its nationals, in which event both States Parties shall sponsor the
application. The criteria and procedures for implementation of the
sponsorship requirements shall be set forth in the rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority.
4. The sponsoring State or States shall, pursuant to article 139, have the
responsibility to ensure, within their legal systems, that a contractor
so sponsored shall carry out activities in the Area in conformity with
the terms of its contract and its obligations under this Convention.
A sponsoring State shall not, however, be liable for damage caused
by any failure of a contractor sponsored by it to comply with its
obligations if that State Party has adopted laws and regulations and
taken administrative measures which are, within the framework of
its legal system, reasonably appropriate for securing compliance by
persons under its jurisdiction.
5. The procedures for assessing the qualifications of States Parties
which are applicants shall take into account their character as States.
6. The qualification standards shall require that every applicant, without
exception, shall as part of his application undertake:
(a) to accept as enforceable and comply with the applicable
obligations created by the provisions of Part XI, the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority, the decisions of
the organs of the Authority and terms of his contracts with the
Authority;
(b) to accept control by the Authority of activities in the Area, as
authorized by this Convention;
(c) to provide the Authority with a written assurance that his
obligations under the contract will be fulfilled in good faith;
(d) to comply with the provisions on the transfer of technology set
forth in article 5 of this Annex.
Article 5
Transfer of technology
[Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 5, paragraph 2]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 5, PARAGRAPH 2
2. The provisions of Annex III, article 5, of the Convention shall
not apply.
80

[Page 81]
Note: Article 5 of Annex III which, pursuant to section 5,
paragraph 2 of the annex to the Agreement, shall not
apply, formerly read as follows:
1. When submitting a plan of work, every applicant shall
make available to the Authority a general description of
the equipment and methods to be used in carrying out
activities in the Area, and other relevant non-proprietary
information about the characteristics of such technology
and information as to where such technology is available.
2. Every operator shall inform the Authority of revisions in the
description and information made available pursuant to
paragraph 1 whenever a substantial technological change
or innovation is introduced.
3. Every contract for carrying out activities in the Area shall
contain the following undertakings by the contractor:
(a) to make available to the Enterprise on fair and
reasonable commercial terms and conditions,
whenever the Authority so requests, the technology
which he uses in carrying out activities in the Area under
the contract, which the contractor is legally entitled
to transfer. This shall be done by means of licences or
other appropriate arrangements which the contractor
shall negotiate with the Enterprise and which shall be
set forth in a specific agreement supplementary to the
contract. This undertaking may be invoked only if the
Enterprise finds that it is unable to obtain the same or
equally efficient and useful technology on the open
market on fair and reasonable commercial terms and
conditions;
(b) to obtain a written assurance from the owner of any
technology used in carrying out activities in the Area
under the contract, which is not generally available
on the open market and which is not covered by
subparagraph (a), that the owner will, whenever the
Authority so requests, make that technology available
to the Enterprise under licence or other appropriate
arrangements and on fair and reasonable commercial
terms and conditions, to the same extent as made
available to the contractor. If this assurance is not
obtained, the technology in question shall not be used
81

[Page 82]
by the contractor in carrying out activities in the Area;
(c) to acquire from the owner by means of an enforceable
contract, upon the request of the Enterprise and if it
is possible to do so without substantial cost to the
contractor, the legal right to transfer to the Enterprise
any technology used by the contractor, in carrying out
activities in the Area under the contract, which the
contractor is otherwise not legally entitled to transfer
and which is not generally available on the open
market. In cases where there is a substantial corporate
relationship between the contractor and the owner of
the technology, the closeness of this relationship and
the degree of control or influence shall be relevant to
the determination whether all feasible measures have
been taken to acquire such a right. In cases where the
contractor exercises effective control over the owner,
failure to acquire from the owner the legal right shall
be considered relevant to the contractor’s qualification
for any subsequent application for approval of a plan
of work;
(d) to facilitate, upon the request of the Enterprise, the
acquisition by the Enterprise of any technology covered
by subparagraph (b), under licence or other appropriate
arrangements and on fair and reasonable commercial
terms and conditions, if the Enterprise decides to
negotiate directly with the owner of the technology;
(e) to take the same measures as are prescribed in
subparagraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) for the benefit of
a developing State or group of developing States
which has applied for a contract under article 9 of this
Annex, provided that these measures shall be limited
to the exploitation of the part of the area proposed
by the contractor which has been reserved pursuant
to article 8 of this Annex and provided that activities
under the contract sought by the developing State or
group of developing States would not involve transfer
of technology to a third State or the nationals of a
third State. The obligation under this provision shall
only apply with respect to any given contractor where
technology has not been requested by the Enterprise or
transferred by that contractor to the Enterprise.
4. Disputes concerning undertakings required by paragraph
82

[Page 83]
3, like other provisions of the contracts, shall be subject to
compulsory settlement in accordance with Part XI and,
in cases of violation of these undertakings, suspension or
termination of the contract or monetary penalties may
be ordered in accordance with article 18 of this Annex.
Disputes as to whether offers made by the contractor are
within the range of fair and reasonable commercial terms
and conditions may be submitted by either party to binding
commercial arbitration in accordance with the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules or such other arbitration rules as may
be prescribed in the rules, regulations and procedures of
the Authority. If the finding is that the offer made by the
contractor is not within the range of fair and reasonable
commercial terms and conditions, the contractor shall be
given 45 days to revise his offer to bring it within that range
before the Authority takes any action in accordance with
article 18 of this Annex.
5. If the Enterprise is unable to obtain on fair and reasonable
commercial terms and conditions appropriate technology
to enable it to commence in a timely manner the recovery
and processing of minerals from the Area, either the
Council or the Assembly may convene a group of States
Parties composed of those which are engaged in activities
in the Area, those which have sponsored entities which are
engaged in activities in the Area and other States Parties
having access to such technology. This group shall consult
together and shall take effective measures to ensure that
such technology is made available to the Enterprise on fair
and reasonable commercial terms and conditions. Each
such State Party shall take all feasible measures to this end
within its own legal system.
6. In the case of joint ventures with the Enterprise, transfer of
technology will be in accordance with the terms of the joint
venture agreement.
7. The undertakings required by paragraph 3 shall be included
in each contract for the carrying out of activities in the Area
until 10 years after the commencement of commercial
production by the Enterprise, and may be invoked during
that period.
8. For the purposes of this article, “technology” means the
specialized equipment and technical know-how, including
manuals, designs, operating instructions, training and
83

[Page 84]
technical advice and assistance, necessary to assemble,
maintain and operate a viable system and the legal right to
use these items for that purpose on a non-exclusive basis.
Article 6
Approval of plans of work
1. Six months after the entry into force of this Convention, and thereafter
each fourth month, the Authority shall take up for consideration
proposed plans of work.
2. When considering an application for approval of a plan of work in the
form of a contract, the Authority shall first ascertain whether:
(a) the applicant has complied with the procedures established
for applications in accordance with article 4 of this Annex
and has given the Authority the undertakings and assurances
required by that article. In cases of non-compliance with these
procedures or in the absence of any of these undertakings and
assurances, the applicant shall be given 45 days to remedy these
defects;
(b) the applicant possesses the requisite qualifications provided for
in article 4 of this Annex.
3. All proposed plans of work shall be taken up in the order in which
they are received. The proposed plans of work shall comply with
and be governed by the relevant provisions of this Convention and
the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, including
those on operational requirements, financial contributions and the
undertakings concerning the transfer of technology. If the proposed
plans of work conform to these requirements, the Authority shall
approve them provided that they are in accordance with the
uniform and non-discriminatory requirements set forth in the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority, unless:
(a) part or all of the area covered by the proposed plan of work is
included in an approved plan of work or a previously submitted
proposed plan of work which has not yet been finally acted on
by the Authority;
(b) part or all of the area covered by the proposed plan of work is
disapproved by the Authority pursuant to article 162, paragraph
2(x); or
(c) the proposed plan of work has been submitted or sponsored by
a State Party which already holds:
84

[Page 85]
(i) plans of work for exploration and exploitation of
polymetallic nodules in non-reserved areas that, together
with either part of the area covered by the application for
a plan of work, exceed in size 30 per cent of a circular area
of 400,000 square kilometres surrounding the centre of
either part of the area covered by the proposed plan of
work;
(ii) plans of work for the exploration and exploitation of
polymetallic nodules in non-reserved areas which, taken
together, constitute 2 per cent of the total seabed area
which is not reserved or disapproved for exploitation
pursuant to article l62 paragraph (2)(x).
4. For the purpose of the standard set forth in paragraph 3(c), a plan
of work submitted by a partnership or consortium shall be counted
on a pro rata basis among the sponsoring States Parties involved in
accordance with article 4, paragraph 3, of this Annex. The Authority
may approve plans of work covered by paragraph 3(c) if it determines
that such approval would not permit a State Party or entities
sponsored by it to monopolize the conduct of activities in the Area
or to preclude other States Parties from activities in the Area.
[5. Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 6, paragraph 7]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 6 TO 11 AND SECTION
6, PARAGRAPH 7
SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 6 TO 11
6. (a) An application for approval of a plan of work for
exploration shall be considered by the Council
following the receipt of a recommendation on
the application from the Legal and Technical
Commission. The processing of an application for
approval of a plan of work for exploration shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention,
including Annex III thereof, and this Agreement,
and subject to the following:
(i) A plan of work for exploration submitted on behalf
of a State or entity, or any component of such
entity, referred to in resolution II, paragraph 1 (a)
(ii) or (iii), other than a registered pioneer investor,
which had already undertaken substantial
activities in the Area prior to the entry into force
85

[Page 86]
of the Convention, or its successor in interest,
shall be considered to have met the financial and
technical qualifications necessary for approval of
a plan of work if the sponsoring State or States
certify that the applicant has expended an amount
equivalent to at least US$30 million in research and
exploration activities and has expended no less
than 10 per cent of that amount in the location,
survey and evaluation of the area referred to in the
plan of work. If the plan of work otherwise satisfies
the requirements of the Convention and any rules,
regulations and procedures adopted pursuant
thereto, it shall be approved by the Council in the
form of a contract. The provisions of section 3,
paragraph 11, of this Annex shall be interpreted
and applied accordingly;
(ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of resolution II,
paragraph 8 (a), a registered pioneer investor may
request approval of a plan of work for exploration
within 36 months of the entry into force of the
Convention. The plan of work for exploration
shall consist of documents, reports and other
data submitted to the Preparatory Commission
both before and after registration and shall be
accompanied by a certificate of compliance,
consisting of a factual report describing the status
of fulfilment of obligations under the pioneer
investor regime, issued by the Preparatory
Commission in accordance with resolution II,
paragraph 11 (a). Such a plan of work shall be
considered to be approved. Such an approved plan
of work shall be in the form of a contract concluded
between the Authority and the registered pioneer
investor in accordance with Part XI and this
Agreement. The fee of US$ 250,000 paid pursuant
to resolution II, paragraph 7 (a), shall be deemed
to be the fee relating to the exploration phase
pursuant to section 8, paragraph 3, of this Annex.
Section 3, paragraph 11, of this Annex shall be
interpreted and applied accordingly;
(iii) In accordance with the principle of non-
discrimination, a contract with a State or entity
86

[Page 87]
or any component of such entity referred to in
subparagraph (a) (i) shall include arrangements
which shall be similar to and no less favorable
than those agreed with any registered pioneer
investor referred to in subparagraph (a) (ii). If
any of the States or entities or any components
of such entities referred to in subparagraph (a)
(i) are granted more favorable arrangements, the
Council shall make similar and no less favorable
arrangements with regard to the rights and
obligations assumed by the registered pioneer
investors referred to in subparagraph (a) (ii),
provided that such arrangements do not affect or
prejudice the interests of the Authority;
(iv) A State sponsoring an application for a plan of
work pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph
(a) (i) or (ii) may be a State Party or a State which
is applying this Agreement provisionally in
accordance with article 7, or a State which is a
member of the Authority on a provisional basis in
accordance with paragraph 12;
(v) Resolution II, paragraph 8 (c), shall be interpreted
and applied in accordance with subparagraph (a) (iv).
(b) The approval of a plan of work for exploration shall
be in accordance with article 153, paragraph 3, of the
Convention.
7. An application for approval of a plan of work shall
be accompanied by an assessment of the potential
environmental impacts of the proposed activities and by a
description of a programme for oceanographic and baseline
environmental studies in accordance with the rules,
regulations and procedures adopted by the Authority.
8. An application for approval of a plan of work for exploration,
subject to paragraph 6 (a) (i) or (ii), shall be processed
in accordance with the procedures set out in section 3,
paragraph 11, of this annex.
9. A plan of work for exploration shall be approved for a
period of 15 years. Upon the expiration of a plan of work
for exploration, the contractor shall apply for a plan of work
for exploitation unless the contractor has already done
so or has obtained an extension for the plan of work for
exploration. Contractors may apply for such extensions for
periods of not more than five years each. Such extensions
87

[Page 88]
shall be approved if the contractor has made efforts in good
faith to comply with the requirements of the plan of work
but for reasons beyond the contractor’s control has been
unable to complete the necessary preparatory work for
proceeding to the exploitation stage or if the prevailing
economic circumstances do not justify proceeding to the
exploitation stage.
10. Designation of a reserved area for the Authority in
accordance with Annex III, article 8, of the Convention shall
take place in connection with approval of an application for
a plan of work for exploration or approval of an application
for a plan of work for exploration and exploitation.
11. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 9, an approved
plan of work for exploration which is sponsored by at least
one State provisionally applying this Agreement shall
terminate if such a State ceases to apply this Agreement
provisionally and has not become a member on a provisional
basis in accordance with paragraph 12 or has not become a
State Party.
…
SECTION 6, PARAGRAPH 7
7. The provisions of … Annex III, article 6, paragraph 5,
… of the Convention shall not apply.
Note: Article 6, paragraph 5, of Annex III which, pursuant to
section 6, paragraph 7 of the annex to the Agreement,
shall not apply, formerly read as follows:
5. Notwithstanding paragraph 3(a), after the end of the
interim period specified in article 151, paragraph 3, the
Authority may adopt by means of rules, regulations and
procedures other procedures and criteria consistent with this
Convention for deciding which applicants shall have plans
of work approved in cases of selection among applicants
for a proposed area. These procedures and criteria shall
ensure approval of plans of work on an equitable and non-
discriminatory basis.
88

[Page 89]
Article 7
Selection among applicants for production authorizations
[Does not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 6, paragraph 7]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 6, PARAGRAPH 7
7. The provisions of … Annex III, … article 7, of the Convention,
shall not apply.
Note: The relevant provisions of article 7 of Annex III,
which, pursuant to section 6, paragraph 7 of the
annex to the Agreement shall not apply, formerly
read as follows:
Article 7
Selection among applicants for production authorizations
1. Six months after the entry into force of this Convention, and
thereafter each fourth month, the Authority shall take up for
consideration applications for production authorizations submitted
during the immediately preceding period. The Authority shall
issue the authorizations applied for if all such applications can
be approved without exceeding the production limitation or
contravening the obligations of the Authority under a commodity
agreement or arrangement to which it has become a party, as
provided in article 151.
2. When a selection must be made among applicants for production
authorizations because of the production limitation set forth in
article 151, paragraphs 2 to 7, or because of the obligations of the
Authority under a commodity agreement or arrangement to which
it has become a party, as provided for in article 151, paragraph 1,
the Authority shall make the selection on the basis of objective and
non-discriminatory standards set forth in its rules, regulations and
procedures.
3. In the application of paragraph 2, the Authority shall give priority to
those applicants which:
(a) give better assurance of performance, taking into account their
financial and technical qualifications and their performance, if
any, under previously approved plans of work;
89

[Page 90]
(b) provide earlier prospective financial benefits to the Authority,
taking into account when commercial production is scheduled
to begin;
(c) have already invested the most resources and effort in
prospecting or exploration.
4. Applicants which are not selected in any period shall have priority in
subsequent periods until they receive a production authorization.
5. Selection shall be made taking into account the need to enhance
opportunities for all States Parties, irrespective of their social
and economic systems or geographical locations so as to avoid
discrimination against any State or system, to participate in activities
in the Area and to prevent monopolization of those activities.
6. Whenever fewer reserved areas than non-reserved areas are under
exploitation, applications for production authorizations with respect
to reserved areas shall have priority.
7. The decisions referred to in this article shall be taken as soon as
possible after the close of each period.
Article 8
Reservation of areas
Each application, other than those submitted by the Enterprise or by any
other entities for reserved areas, shall cover a total area, which need not
be a single continuous area, sufficiently large and of sufficient estimated
commercial value to allow two mining operations. The applicant shall
indicate the coordinates dividing the area into two parts of equal
estimated commercial value and submit all the data obtained by him with
respect to both parts. Without prejudice to the powers of the Authority
pursuant to article 17 of this Annex, the data to be submitted concerning
polymetallic nodules shall relate to mapping, sampling, the abundance
of nodules, and their metal content. Within 45 days of receiving such
data, the Authority shall designate which part is to be reserved solely for
the conduct of activities by the Authority through the Enterprise or in
association with developing States. This designation may be deferred for a
further period of 45 days if the Authority requests an independent expert
to assess whether all data required by this article has been submitted. The
area designated shall become a reserved area as soon as the plan of work
for the non-reserved area is approved and the contract is signed.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPH 10
10. Designation of a reserved area for the Authority in
90

[Page 91]
accordance with Annex III, article 8, of the Convention shall
take place in connection with approval of an application for
a plan of work for exploration or approval of an application
for a plan of work for exploration and exploitation.
Article 9
Activities in reserved areas
1. The Enterprise shall be given an opportunity to decide whether it
intends to carry out activities in each reserved area. This decision may
be taken at any time, unless a notification pursuant to paragraph 4
is received by the Authority, in which event the Enterprise shall take
its decision within a reasonable time. The Enterprise may decide to
exploit such areas in joint ventures with the interested State or entity.
2. The Enterprise may conclude contracts for the execution of part
of its activities in accordance with Annex IV, article 12. It may also
enter into joint ventures for the conduct of such activities with any
entities which are eligible to carry out activities in the Area pursuant
to article 153, paragraph 2(b). When considering such joint ventures,
the Enterprise shall offer to States Parties which are developing
States and their nationals the opportunity of effective participation.
3. The Authority may prescribe, in its rules, regulations and procedures,
substantive and procedural requirements and conditions with
respect to such contracts and joint ventures.
4. Any State Party which is a developing State or any natural or juridical
person sponsored by it and effectively controlled by it or by other
developing State which is a qualified applicant, or any group of the
foregoing, may notify the Authority that it wishes to submit a plan
of work pursuant to article 6 of this Annex with respect to a reserved
area. The plan of work shall be considered if the Enterprise decides,
pursuant to paragraph 1, that it does not intend to carry out activities
in that area.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 2, PARAGRAPH 5
5. A contractor which has contributed a particular area to the
Authority as a reserved area has the right of first refusal to
enter into a joint-venture arrangement with the Enterprise
for exploration and exploitation of that area. If the Enterprise
does not submit an application for a plan of work for activities
in respect of such a reserved area within 15 years of the
commencement of its functions independent of the Secretariat
91

[Page 92]
of the Authority or within 15 years of the date on which that
area is reserved for the Authority, whichever is the later, the
contractor which contributed the area shall be entitled to apply
for a plan of work for that area provided it offers in good faith
to include the Enterprise as a joint-venture partner.
Article 10
Preference and priority among applicants
An operator who has an approved plan of work for exploration only, as
provided in article 3, paragraph 4(c), of this Annex shall have a preference
and a priority among applicants for a plan of work covering exploitation
of the same area and resources. However, such preference or priority may
be withdrawn if the operator’s performance has not been satisfactory.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPH 13
13. The reference in Annex III, article 10, of the Convention
to performance which has not been satisfactory shall be
interpreted to mean that the contractor has failed to comply
with the requirements of an approved plan of work in spite
of a written warning or warnings from the Authority to the
contractor to comply therewith.
Article 11
Joint arrangements
1. Contracts may provide for joint arrangements between the
contractor and the Authority through the Enterprise, in the form of
joint ventures or production sharing, as well as any other form of
joint arrangement, which shall have the same protection against
revision, suspension or termination as contracts with the Authority.
2. Contractors entering into such joint arrangements with the Enterprise
may receive financial incentives as provided for in article 13 of this
Annex.
3. Partners in joint ventures with the Enterprise shall be liable for the
payments required by article 13 of this Annex to the extent of their
share in the joint ventures, subject to financial incentives as provided
for in that article.
92

[Page 93]
Article 12
Activities carried out by the Enterprise
1. Activities in the Area carried out by the Enterprise pursuant to article
153, paragraph 2(a), shall be governed by Part XI, the rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority and its relevant decisions.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 2, PARAGRAPH 4
4. The obligations applicable to contractors shall apply to
the Enterprise. Notwithstanding the provisions of article
153, paragraph 3, and Annex III, article 3, paragraph 5, of
the Convention, a plan of work for the Enterprise upon
its approval shall be in the form of a contract concluded
between the Authority and the Enterprise.
2. Any plan of work submitted by the Enterprise shall be accompanied
by evidence supporting its financial and technical capabilities.
Article 13
Financial terms of contracts
1. In adopting rules, regulations and procedures concerning the
financial terms of a contract between the Authority and the entities
referred to in article 153, paragraph 2(b), and in negotiating those
financial terms in accordance with Part XI and those rules, regulations
and procedures, the Authority shall be guided by the following
objectives:
(a) to ensure optimum revenues for the Authority from the
proceeds of commercial production;
(b) to attract investments and technology to the exploration and
exploitation of the Area;
(c) to ensure equality of financial treatment and comparable
financial obligations for contractors;
(d) to provide incentives on a uniform and non-discriminatory
basis for contractors to undertake joint arrangements with the
Enterprise and developing States or their nationals, to stimulate
the transfer of technology thereto, and to train the personnel of
the Authority and of developing States;
(e) to enable the Enterprise to engage in seabed mining effectively
at the same time as the entities referred to in article 153,
paragraph 2(b); and
(f) to ensure that, as a result of the financial incentives provided to
93

[Page 94]
contractors under paragraph 14, under the terms of contracts
reviewed in accordance with article 19 of this Annex or under
the provisions of article 11 of this Annex with respect to joint
ventures, contractors are not subsidized so as to be given an
artificial competitive advantage with respect to land-based
miners.
2. A fee shall be levied for the administrative cost of processing an
application for approval of a plan of work in the form of a contract
and shall be fixed at an amount of $US500,000 per application.3 The
amount of the fee shall be reviewed from time to time by the Council
in order to ensure that it covers the administrative cost incurred. If
such administrative cost incurred by the Authority in processing an
application is less than the fixed amount, the Authority shall refund
the difference to the applicant.
[3-10. Do not apply. See Agreement, annex, section 8, paragraph 2]
11. All costs, expenditures, proceeds and revenues, and all prices and
values referred to in this article, shall be determined in accordance
with generally recognized accounting principles and the financial
rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority.
12. Payments to the Authority under paragraphs 5 and 64 shall be made
in freely usable currencies or currencies which are freely available
and effectively usable on the major foreign exchange markets or,
at the contractor’s option, in the equivalents of processed metals at
market value. The market value shall be determined in accordance
with paragraph 5(b).5 The freely usable currencies and currencies
3 The Agreement, annex, section 8, paragraph 3 provides that with regard to the
implementation of Annex III, article 13, paragraph 2, of the Convention, the fee for
processing applications for approval of a plan of work limited to one phase, either the
exploration phase or the exploitation phase, shall be US$ 250,000. In accordance with
article 2, paragraph 1, of the Agreement, the provisions of the Agreement and Part XI
shall be interpreted and applied together as a single instrument. In the event of any
inconsistency between the Agreement and Part XI, the provisions of the Agreement shall
prevail.
4 Paragraphs 5 and 6 of article 13 do not apply. However, provisions relating to
Financial Terms of Contracts occur in the Agreement, annex, section 8. In accordance
with article 2, paragraph 1, of the Agreement, the provisions of the Agreement and Part
XI shall be interpreted and applied together as a single instrument. In the event of any
inconsistency between the Agreement and Part XI, the provisions of the Agreement shall
prevail.
5 Paragraph 5(b) of article 13 does not apply. However, provisions relating to Financial
Terms of Contracts occur in the Agreement, annex, section 8. In accordance with article
2, paragraph 1, of the Agreement, the provisions of the Agreement and Part XI shall be
94

[Page 95]
which are freely available and effectively usable on the major
foreign exchange markets shall be defined in the rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority in accordance with prevailing
international monetary practice.
13. All financial obligations of the contractor to the Authority, as well as
all his fees, costs, expenditures, proceeds and revenues referred to in
this article, shall be adjusted by expressing them in constant terms
relative to a base year.
14. The Authority may, taking into account any recommendations of
the Economic Planning Commission and the Legal and Technical
Commission, adopt rules, regulations and procedures that provide for
incentives, on a uniform and non-discriminatory basis, to contractors
to further the objectives set out in paragraph 1.
15. In the event of a dispute between the Authority and a contractor
over the interpretation or application of the financial terms of a
contract, either party may submit the dispute to binding commercial
arbitration, unless both parties agree to settle the dispute by other
means, in accordance with article 188, paragraph 2.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 8
SECTION 8. FINANCIAL TERMS OF CONTRACTS
1. The following principles shall provide the basis for
establishing rules, regulations and procedures for financial
terms of contracts:
(a) The system of payments to the Authority shall be fair
both to the contractor and to the Authority and shall
provide adequate means of determining compliance
by the contractor with such system;
(b) The rates of payments under the system shall be within
the range of those prevailing in respect of land-based
mining of the same or similar minerals in order to avoid
giving deep seabed miners an artificial competitive
advantage or imposing on them a competitive
disadvantage;
(c) The system should not be complicated and should not
impose major administrative costs on the Authority
or on a contractor. Consideration should be given to
the adoption of a royalty system or a combination
interpreted and applied together as a single instrument. In the event of any inconsistency
between the Agreement and Part XI, the provisions of the Agreement shall prevail.
95

[Page 96]
of a royalty and profit-sharing system. If alternative
systems are decided upon, the contractor has the right
to choose the system applicable to its contract. Any
subsequent change in choice between alternative
systems, however, shall be made by agreement
between the Authority and the contractor;
(d) An annual fixed fee shall be payable from the date of
commencement of commercial production. This fee
may be credited against other payments due under
the system adopted in accordance with subparagraph
(c). The amount of the fee shall be established by the
Council;
(e) The system of payments may be revised periodically
in the light of changing circumstances. Any changes
shall be applied in a non-discriminatory manner. Such
changes may apply to existing contracts only at the
election of the contractor. Any subsequent change in
choice between alternative systems shall be made by
agreement between the Authority and the contractor;
(f) Disputes concerning the interpretation or application
of the rules and regulations based on these principles
shall be subject to the dispute settlement procedures
set out in the Convention.
2. The provisions of Annex III, article 13, paragraphs 3 to 10, of
the Convention shall not apply.
3. With regard to the implementation of Annex III, article
13, paragraph 2, of the Convention, the fee for processing
applications for approval of a plan of work limited to one
phase, either the exploration phase or the exploitation
phase, shall be US$ 250,000.
Note: The relevant provisions of Article 13 of Annex III which,
pursuant to section 8, paragraph 2 of the annex to the
Agreement, shall not apply, formerly read as follows:
…
3. A contractor shall pay an annual fixed fee of $US 1 million
from the date of entry into force of the contract. If the
approved date of commencement of commercial production
is postponed because of a delay in issuing the production
authorization, in accordance with article 151, the annual
fixed fee shall be waived for the period of postponement.
96

[Page 97]
From the date of commencement of commercial production,
the contractor shall pay either the production charge or the
annual fixed fee, whichever is greater.
4. Within a year of the date of commencement of commercial
production, in conformity with paragraph 3, a contractor
shall choose to make his financial contribution to the
Authority by either:
(a) paying a production charge only; or
(b) paying a combination of a production charge and a
share of net proceeds.
5. (a) If a contractor chooses to make his financial contribu-
tion to the Authority by paying a production charge
only, it shall be fixed at a percentage of the market
value of the processed metals produced from the
polymetallic nodules recovered from the area cov-
ered by the contract. This percentage shall be fixed
as follows:
(i) years 1-10 of commercial production
5 per cent
(ii) years 11 to the end of commercial production
12 per cent
(b) The said market value shall be the product of the
quantity of the processed metals produced from the
polymetallic nodules extracted from the area covered
by the contract and the average price for those metals
during the relevant accounting year, as defined in
paragraphs 7 and 8.
6. If a contractor chooses to make his financial contribution
to the Authority by paying a combination of a production
charge and a share of net proceeds, such payments shall be
determined as follows:
(a) The production charge shall be fixed at a percentage
of the market value, determined in accordance with
subparagraph (b), of the processed metals produced
from the polymetallic nodules recovered from the area
covered by the contract. This percentage shall be fixed
as follows:
(i) first period of commercial production 2 per cent
(ii) second period of commercial production 4 per cent
If, in the second period of commercial production,
as defined in subparagraph (d), the return on
investment in any accounting year as defined in
97

[Page 98]
subparagraph (m) falls below 15 per cent as a
result of the payment of the production charge at 4
per cent, the production charge shall be 2 per cent
instead of 4 per cent in that accounting year.
(b) The said market value shall be the product of the
quantity of the processed metals produced from the
polymetallic nodules recovered from the area covered
by the contract and the average price for those metals
during the relevant accounting year as defined in
paragraphs 7 and 8.
(c) (i) The Authority’s share of net proceeds shall be taken
out of that portion of the contractor’s net proceeds
which is attributable to the mining of the resources
of the area covered by the contract, referred to
hereinafter as attributable net proceeds.
(ii) The Authority’s share of attributable net proceeds
shall be determined in accordance with following
incremental schedule:
Portion of Share of the Authority
attributable
Net proceeds
First period Second period
of commercial of commercial
production production
That portion
representing
a return on
investment
35 per cent 40 per cent
which is greater
than 0 per cent,
but less than
10 per cent
That portion
representing
a return on
investment
42.5 per cent 50 per cent
which is 10 per
cent or greater,
but less than 20
per cent
98

[Page 99]
That portion
representing a
return on
50 per cent 70 per cent
investment
which is 20 per
cent or greater
(d) (i) The first period of commercial production referred
to in subparagraphs (a) and (c) shall commence in
the first accounting year of commercial production
and terminate in the accounting year in which the
contractor’s development costs with interest on the
unrecovered portion thereof are fully recovered by
his cash surplus, as follows:
In the first accounting year during which develop-
ment costs are incurred, unrecovered development
costs shall equal the development costs less cash
surplus in that year. In each subsequent account-
ing year, unrecovered development costs shall
equal the unrecovered development costs at the
end of the preceding accounting year, plus inter-
est thereon at the rate of 10 per cent per annum,
plus development costs incurred in the current ac-
counting year and less contractor’s cash surplus in
the current accounting year. The accounting year
in which unrecovered development costs become
zero for the first time shall be the accounting year
in which the contractor’s development costs with
interest on the unrecovered portion thereof are ful-
ly recovered by his cash surplus. The contractor’s
cash surplus in any accounting year shall be his
gross proceeds less his operating costs and less his
payments to the Authority under subparagraph (c).
(ii) The second period of commercial production shall
commence in the accounting year following the
termination of the first period of commercial
production and shall continue until the end of the
contract.
(e) “Attributable net proceeds” means the product of the
contractor’s net proceeds and the ratio of development
costs in the mining sector to the contractor’s
development costs. If the contractor engages in mining,
transporting polymetallic nodules and production
99

[Page 100]
primarily of three processed metals, namely, cobalt,
copper and nickel, the amount of attributable net
proceeds shall not be less than 25 per cent of the
contractor’s net proceeds. Subject to subparagraph (n),
in all other cases, including those where the contractor
engages in mining, transporting polymetallic nodules,
and production primarily of four processed metals,
namely, cobalt, copper, manganese and nickel, the
Authority may, in its rules, regulations and procedures,
prescribe appropriate floors which shall bear the same
relationship to each case as the 25 per cent floor does to
the three-metal case.
(f) “Contractor’s net proceeds” means the contractor’s
gross proceeds less his operating costs and less
the recovery of his development costs as set out in
subparagraph (j).
(g) (i) If the contractor engages in mining, transporing
polymetallic nodules and production of processed
metals, “contractor’s gross proceeds” means the
gross revenues from the sale of the processed met-
als and any other monies deemed reasonably at-
tributable to operations under the contract in ac-
cordance with the financial rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority.
(ii) In all cases other than those specified in subpar-
agraphs (g)(i) and (n)(iii), “contractor’s gross pro-
ceeds” means the gross revenues from the sale of
the semi-processed metals from the polymetallic
nodules recovered from the area covered by the
contract, and any other monies deemed reasona-
bly attributable to operations under the contract
in accordance with the financial rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority.
(h) “Contractor’s development costs” means:
(i) all expenditures incurred prior to the
commencement of commercial production
which are directly related to the development of
the productive capacity of the area covered by
the contract and the activities related thereto
for operations under the contract in all cases
other than that specified in subparagraph (n), in
conformity with generally recognized accounting
100

[Page 101]
principles, including, inter alia, costs of machinery,
equipment, ships, processing plant, construction,
buildings, land, roads, prospecting and exploration
of the area covered by the contract, research and
development, interest, required leases, licences and
fees; and
(ii) expenditures similar to those set forth in (i) above
incurred subsequent to the commencement of
commercial production and necessary to carry
out the plan of work, except those chargeable to
operating costs.
(i) The proceeds from the disposal of capital assets and the
market value of those capital assets which are no longer
required for operations under the contract and which
are not sold shall be deducted from the contractor’s
development costs during the relevant accounting
year. When these deductions exceed the contractor’s
development costs the excess shall be added to the
contractor’s gross proceeds.
(j) The contractor’s development costs incurred prior
to the commencement of commercial production
referred to in subparagraphs (h)(i) and (n)(iv) shall be
recovered in 10 equal annual instalments from the date
of commencement of commercial production. The
contractor’s development costs incurred subsequent to
the commencement of commercial production referred
to in subparagraphs (h)(ii) and (n)(iv) shall be recovered
in 10 or fewer equal annual instalments so as to ensure
their complete recovery by the end of the contract.
(k) “Contractor’s operating costs” means all expenditures
incurred after the commencement of commercial
production in the operation of the productive capacity
of the area covered by the contract and the activities
related thereto for operations under the contract, in
conformity with generally recognized accounting
principles, including, inter alia, the annual fixed
fee or the production charge, whichever is greater,
expenditures for wages, salaries, employee benefits,
materials, services, transporting, processing and
marketing costs, interest, utilities, preservation of the
marine environment, overhead and administrative
costs specifically related to operations under the
101

[Page 102]
contract, and any net operating losses carried forward
or backward as specified herein. Net operating losses
may be carried forward for two consecutive years except
in the last two years of the contract in which case they
may be carried backward to the two preceding years.
(l) If the contractor engages in mining, transporting of
polymetallic nodules, and production of processed
and semi-processed metals, “development costs of the
mining sector” means the portion of the contractor’s
development costs which is directly related to the
mining of the resources of the area covered by the
contract, in conformity with generally recognized
accounting principles, and the financial rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority, including,
inter alia, application fee, annual fixed fee and, where
applicable, costs of prospecting and exploration of the
area covered by the contract, and a portion of research
and development costs.
(m) “Return on investment” in any accounting year means
the ratio of attributable net proceeds in that year to
the development costs of the mining sector. For the
purpose of computing this ratio the development costs
of the mining sector shall include expenditures on new
or replacement equipment in the mining sector less the
original cost of the equipment replaced.
(n) If the contractor engages in mining only:
(i) “attributable net proceeds” means the whole of the
contractor’s net proceeds;
(ii) “contractor’s net proceeds” shall be as defined in
subparagraph (f);
(iii) “contractor’s gross proceeds” means the gross
revenues from the sale of the polymetallic nodules,
and any other monies deemed reasonably
attributable to operations under the contract in
accordance with the financial rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority;
(iv) “contractor’s development costs” means all
expenditures incurred prior to the commencement
of commercial production as set forth in
subparagraph (h)(i), and all expenditures incurred
subsequent to the commencement of commercial
production as set forth in subparagraph (h)(ii),
102

[Page 103]
which are directly related to the mining of the
resources of the area covered by the contract, in
conformity with generally recognized accounting
principles;
(v) “contractor’s operating costs” means the
contractor’s operating costs as in subparagraph
(k) which are directly related to the mining of the
resources of the area covered by the contract in
conformity with generally recognized accounting
principles;
(vi) “return on investment” in any accounting year
means the ratio of the contractor’s net proceeds
in that year to the contractor’s development
costs. For the purpose of computing this ratio,
the contractor’s development costs shall include
expenditures on new or replacement equipment
less the original cost of the equipment replaced.
(o) The costs referred to in subparagraphs (h), (k), (l) and
(n) in respect of interest paid by the contractor shall be
allowed to the extent that, in all the circumstances, the
Authority approves, pursuant to article 4, paragraph
1, of this Annex, the debt-equity ratio and the rates
of interest as reasonable, having regard to existing
commercial practice.
(p) The costs referred to in this paragraph shall not be
interpreted as including payments of corporate income
taxes or similar charges levied by States in respect of
the operations of the contractor.
7. (a) “Processed metals”, referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6,
means the metals in the most basic form in which
they are customarily traded on international
terminal markets. For this purpose, the Authority
shall specify, in its financial rules, regulations and
procedures, the relevant international terminal
market. For the metals which are not traded on
such markets, “processed metals” means the metals
in the most basic form in which they are customarily
traded in representative arm’s length transactions.
(b) If the Authority cannot otherwise determine the
quantity of the processed metals produced from the
polymetallic nodules recovered from the area covered
by the contract referred to in paragraphs 5(b) and
103

[Page 104]
6(b), the quantity shall be determined on the basis of
the metal content of the nodules, processing recovery
efficiency and other relevant factors, in accordance
with the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Authority and in conformity with generally recognized
accounting principles.
8. If an international terminal market provides a representative
pricing mechanism for processed metals, polymetallic
nodules and semi-processed metals from the nodules, the
average price on that market shall be used. In all other
cases, the Authority shall, after consulting the contractor,
determine a fair price for the said products in accordance
with paragraph 9.
9. (a) All costs, expenditures, proceeds and revenues and all
determinations of price and value referred to in
this article shall be the result of free market or
arm’s length transactions. In the absence thereof,
they shall be determined by the Authority, after
consulting the contractor, as though they were the
result of free market or arm’s length transactions,
taking into account relevant transactions in other
markets.
(b) In order to ensure compliance with and enforcement
of the provisions of this paragraph, the Authority
shall be guided by the principles adopted for, and the
interpretation given to, arm’s length transactions by
the Commission on Transnational Corporations of the
United Nations, the Group of Experts on Tax Treaties
between Developing and Developed Countries and
other international organizations, and shall, in its
rules, regulations and procedures, specify uniform
and internationally acceptable accounting rules
and procedures, and the means of selection by the
contractor of certified independent accountants
acceptable to the Authority for the purpose of carrying
out auditing in compliance with those rules, regulations
and procedures.
10. The contractor shall make available to the accountants,
in accordance with the financial rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority, such financial data as are
required to determine compliance with this article.
…
104

[Page 105]
Article 14
Transfer of data
1. The operator shall transfer to the Authority, in accordance with its
rules, regulations and procedures and the terms and conditions
of the plan of work, at time intervals determined by the Authority
all data which are both necessary for and relevant to the effective
exercise of the powers and functions of the principal organs of the
Authority in respect of the area covered by the plan of work.
2. Transferred data in respect of the area covered by the plan of work,
deemed proprietary, may only be used for the purposes set forth
in this article. Data necessary for the formulation by the Authority
of rules, regulations and procedures concerning protection of the
marine environment and safety, other than equipment design data,
shall not be deemed proprietary.
3. Data transferred to the Authority by prospectors, applicants for
contracts or contractors, deemed proprietary, shall not be disclosed
by the Authority to the Enterprise or to anyone external to the
Authority, but data on the reserved areas may be disclosed to the
Enterprise. Such data transferred by such persons to the Enterprise
shall not be disclosed by the Enterprise to the Authority or to anyone
external to the Authority.
Article 15
Training programmes
The contractor shall draw up practical programmes for the training
of personnel of the Authority and developing States, including the
participation of such personnel in all activities in the Area which are
covered by the contract, in accordance with article 144, paragraph 2.
Article 16
Exclusive right to explore and exploit
The Authority shall, pursuant to Part XI and its rules, regulations and
procedures, accord the operator the exclusive right to explore and exploit
the area covered by the plan of work in respect of a specified category of
resources and shall ensure that no other entity operates in the same area
for a different category of resources in a manner which might interfere
with the operations of the operator. The operator shall have security of
tenure in accordance with article 153, paragraph 6.
105

[Page 106]
Article 17
Rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority
1. The Authority shall adopt and uniformly apply rules, regulations and
procedures in accordance with article 160, paragraph 2(f)(ii), and
article 162, paragraph 2(o)(ii), for the exercise of its functions as set
forth in Part XI on, inter alia, the following matters:
(a) administrative procedures relating to prospecting, exploration
and exploitation in the Area;
(b) operations:
(i) size of area;
(ii) duration of operations;
(iii) performance requirements including assurances pursuant
to article 4, paragraph 6(c), of this Annex;
(iv) categories of resources;
(v) renunciation of areas;
(vi) progress reports;
(vii) submission of data;
(viii) inspection and supervision of operations;
(ix) prevention of interference with other activities in the
marine environment;
(x) transfer of rights and obligations by a contractor;
(xi) procedures for transfer of technology to developing
States in accordance with article 144 and for their direct
participation;
(xii) mining standards and practices, including those relating
to operational safety, conservation of the resources and
the protection of the marine environment;
(xiii) definition of commercial production;
(xiv) qualification standards for applicants;
(c) financial matters:
(i) establishment of uniform and non-discriminatory costing
and accounting rules and the method of selection of
auditors;
(ii) apportionment of proceeds of operations;
(iii) the incentives referred to in article 13 of this Annex;
(d) implementation of decisions taken pursuant to article 151,
paragraph 10, and article 164, paragraph 2(d).
2. Rules, regulations and procedures on the following items shall fully
reflect the objective criteria set out below:
(a) Size of areas:
The Authority shall determine the appropriate size of areas for
106

[Page 107]
exploration which may be up to twice as large as those for
exploitation in order to permit intensive exploration operations.
The size of area shall be calculated to satisfy the requirements
of article 8 of this Annex on reservation of areas as well as
stated production requirements consistent with article 151 in
accordance with the terms of the contract taking into account
the state of the art of technology then available for sea-bed
mining and the relevant physical characteristics of the areas.
Areas shall be neither smaller nor larger than are necessary to
satisfy this objective.
(b) Duration of operations:
(i) Prospecting shall be without time-limit;
(ii) Exploration should be of sufficient duration to permit
a thorough survey of the specific area, the design and
construction of mining equipment for the area and
the design and construction of small and medium-size
processing plants for the purpose of testing mining and
processing systems;
(iii) The duration of exploitation should be related to
the economic life of the mining project, taking into
consideration such factors as the depletion of the ore,
the useful life of mining equipment and processing
facilities and commercial viability. Exploitation should
be of sufficient duration to permit commercial extraction
of minerals of the area and should include a reasonable
time period for construction of commercial-scale mining
and processing systems, during which period commercial
production should not be required. The total duration
of exploitation, however, should also be short enough
to give the Authority an opportunity to amend the
terms and conditions of the plan of work at the time it
considers renewal in accordance with rules, regulations
and procedures which it has adopted subsequent to
approving the plan of work.
(c) Performance requirements:
The Authority shall require that during the exploration stage
periodic expenditures be made by the operator which are
reasonably related to the size of the area covered by the plan of
work and the expenditures which would be expected of a bona
fide operator who intended to bring the area into commercial
production within the time-limits established by the Authority.
The required expenditures should not be established at a level
107

[Page 108]
which would discourage prospective operators with less costly
technology than is prevalently in use. The Authority shall
establish a maximum time interval, after the exploration stage
is completed and the exploitation stage begins, to achieve
commercial production. To determine this interval, the Authority
should take into consideration that construction of large-scale
mining and processing systems cannot be initiated until after the
termination of the exploration stage and the commencement
of the exploitation stage. Accordingly, the interval to bring an
area into commercial production should take into account the
time necessary for this construction after the completion of the
exploration stage and reasonable allowance should be made
for unavoidable delays in the construction schedule. Once
commercial production is achieved, the Authority shall within
reasonable limits and taking into consideration all relevant
factors require the operator to maintain commercial production
throughout the period of the plan of work.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 1, PARAGRAPHS 5, 15 AND 16
5. Between the entry into force of the Convention and the
approval of the first plan of work for exploitation, the
Authority shall concentrate on:
…
(f) Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures
necessary for the conduct of activities in the Area as
they progress. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Annex III, article 17, paragraph 2 (b) and (c), of the
Convention, such rules, regulations and procedures
shall take into account the terms of this Agreement,
the prolonged delay in commercial deep seabed
mining and the likely pace of activities in the Area;
(g) Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures
incorporating applicable standards for the protection
and preservation of the marine environment;
…
(k) Timely elaboration of rules, regulations and procedures
for exploitation, including those relating to the protec-
tion and preservation of the marine environment;
…
15. The Authority shall elaborate and adopt, in accordance
108

[Page 109]
with article 162, paragraph 2 (o) (ii), of the Convention,
rules, regulations and procedures based on the principles
contained in sections 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this Annex, as well as
any additional rules, regulations and procedures necessary
to facilitate the approval of plans of work for exploration
or exploitation, in accordance with the following
subparagraphs:
(a) The Council may undertake such elaboration any time
it deems that all or any of such rules, regulations or
procedures are required for the conduct of activities
in the Area, or when it determines that commercial
exploitation is imminent, or at the request of a State
whose national intends to apply for approval of a plan
of work for exploitation;
(b) If a request is made by a State referred to in subparagraph
(a) the Council shall, in accordance with article 162,
paragraph 2 (o), of the Convention, complete the
adoption of such rules, regulations and procedures
within two years of the request;
(c) If the Council has not completed the elaboration
of the rules, regulations and procedures relating
to exploitation within the prescribed time and
an application for approval of a plan of work for
exploitation is pending, it shall none the less consider
and provisionally approve such plan of work based
on the provisions of the Convention and any rules,
regulations and procedures that the Council may
have adopted provisionally, or on the basis of the
norms contained in the Convention and the terms
and principles contained in this Annex as well as the
principle of non-discrimination among contractors.
16. The draft rules, regulations and procedures and any
recommendations relating to the provisions of Part XI,
as contained in the reports and recommendations of the
Preparatory Commission, shall be taken into account by
the Authority in the adoption of rules, regulations and
procedures in accordance with Part XI and this Agreement.
(d) Categories of resources:
In determining the category of resources in respect of which a
plan of work may be approved, the Authority shall give emphasis
inter alia to the following characteristics:
109

[Page 110]
(i) that certain resources require the use of similar mining
methods; and
(ii) that some resources can be developed simultaneously
without undue interference between operators
developing different resources in the same area.
Nothing in this subparagraph shall preclude the Authority
from approving a plan of work with respect to more than
one category of resources in the same area to the same
applicant.
(e) Renunciation of areas:
The operator shall have the right at any time to renounce without
penalty the whole or part of his rights in the area covered by a
plan of work.
(f) Protection of the marine environment:
Rules, regulations and procedures shall be drawn up in order
to secure effective protection of the marine environment from
harmful effects directly resulting from activities in the Area or
from shipboard processing immediately above a mine site of
minerals derived from that mine site, taking into account the
extent to which such harmful effects may directly result from
drilling, dredging, coring and excavation and from disposal,
dumping and discharge into the marine environment of
sediment, wastes or other effluents.
(g) Commercial production:
Commercial production shall be deemed to have begun if an
operator engages in sustained large-scale recovery operations
which yield a quantity of materials sufficient to indicate clearly
that the principal purpose is large-scale production rather than
production intended for information gathering, analysis or the
testing of equipment or plant.
Article 18
Penalties
1. A contractor’s rights under the contract may be suspended or
terminated only in the following cases:
(a) if, in spite of warnings by the Authority, the contractor has
conducted his activities in such a way as to result in serious,
persistent and wilful violations of the fundamental terms of the
contract, Part XI and the rules, regulations and procedures of
the Authority; or
(b) if the contractor has failed to comply with a final binding
110

[Page 111]
decision of the dispute settlement body applicable to him.
2. In the case of any violation of the contract not covered by paragraph
1(a), or in lieu of suspension or termination under paragraph 1(a),
the Authority may impose upon the contractor monetary penalties
proportionate to the seriousness of the violation.
3. Except for emergency orders under article 162, paragraph 2(w), the
Authority may not execute a decision involving monetary penalties,
suspension or termination until the contractor has been accorded a
reasonable opportunity to exhaust the judicial remedies available to
him pursuant to Part XI, section 5.
Article 19
Revision of contract
1. When circumstances have arisen or are likely to arise which, in the
opinion of either party, would render the contract inequitable or
make it impracticable or impossible to achieve the objectives set out
in the contract or in Part XI, the parties shall enter into negotiations
to revise it accordingly.
2. Any contract entered into in accordance with article 153, paragraph
3, may be revised only with the consent of the parties.
Article 20
Transfer of rights and obligations
The rights and obligations arising under a contract may be transferred
only with the consent of the Authority, and in accordance with its rules,
regulations and procedures. The Authority shall not unreasonably
withhold consent to the transfer if the proposed transferee is in all respects
a qualified applicant and assumes all of the obligations of the transferor
and if the transfer does not confer to the transferee a plan of work, the
approval of which would be forbidden by article 6, paragraph 3(c), of this
Annex.
Article 21
Applicable law
1. The contract shall be governed by the terms of the contract, the
rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, Part XI and other
rules of international law not incompatible with this Convention.
2. Any final decision rendered by a court or tribunal having jurisdiction
under this Convention relating to the rights and obligations of the
111

[Page 112]
Authority and of the contractor shall be enforceable in the territory
of each State Party.
3. No State Party may impose conditions on a contractor that are
inconsistent with Part XI. However, the application by a State
Party to contractors sponsored by it, or to ships flying its flag, of
environmental or other laws and regulations more stringent than
those in the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority
adopted pursuant to article 17, paragraph 2(f), of this Annex shall
not be deemed inconsistent with Part XI.
Article 22
Responsibility
The contractor shall have responsibility or liability for any damage arising
out of wrongful acts in the conduct of its operations, account being taken
of contributory acts or omissions by the Authority. Similarly, the Authority
shall have responsibility or liability for any damage arising out of wrongful
acts in the exercise of its powers and functions, including violations under
article 168, paragraph 2, account being taken of contributory acts or
omissions by the contractor. Liability in every case shall be for the actual
amount of damage.
112

[Page 113]
ANNEX IV.
STATUTE OF THE ENTERPRISE
Article 1
Purposes
1. The Enterprise is the organ of the Authority which shall carry out
activities in the Area directly, pursuant to article 153, paragraph 2(a),
as well as the transporting, processing and marketing of minerals
recovered from the Area.
2. In carrying out its purposes and in the exercise of its functions, the
Enterprise shall act in accordance with this Convention and the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Authority.
3. In developing the resources of the Area pursuant to paragraph 1, the
Enterprise shall, subject to this Convention, operate in accordance
with sound commercial principles.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 2
SECTION 2. THE ENTERPRISE
1. The Secretariat of the Authority shall perform the functions
of the Enterprise until it begins to operate independently of
the Secretariat. The Secretary-General of the Authority shall
appoint from within the staff of the Authority an interim
Director-General to oversee the performance of these
functions by the Secretariat.
These functions shall be:
(a) Monitoring and review of trends and developments
relating to deep seabed mining activities, including
regular analysis of world metal market conditions and
metal prices, trends and prospects;
(b) Assessment of the results of the conduct of marine
scientific research with respect to activities in the Area,
with particular emphasis on research related to the
environmental impact of activities in the Area;
(c) Assessment of available data relating to prospecting
and exploration, including the criteria for such
activities;
(d) Assessment of technological developments relevant to
113

[Page 114]
activities in the Area, in particular technology relating
to the protection and preservation of the marine
environment;
(e) Evaluation of information and data relating to areas
reserved for the Authority;
(f) Assessment of approaches to joint-venture operations;
(g) Collection of information on the availability of trained
manpower;
(h) Study of managerial policy options for the
administration of the Enterprise at different stages of
its operations.
2. The Enterprise shall conduct its initial deep seabed mining
operations through joint ventures. Upon the approval of
a plan of work for exploitation for an entity other than the
Enterprise, or upon receipt by the Council of an application
for a joint-venture operation with the Enterprise, the Council
shall take up the issue of the functioning of the Enterprise
independently of the Secretariat of the Authority. If joint-
venture operations with the Enterprise accord with sound
commercial principles, the Council shall issue a directive
pursuant to article 170, paragraph 2, of the Convention
providing for such independent functioning.
…
6. Article 170, paragraph 4, Annex IV and other provisions
of the Convention relating to the Enterprise shall be
interpreted and applied in accordance with this section.
Article 2
Relationship to the Authority
1. Pursuant to article 170, the Enterprise shall act in accordance with the
general policies of the Assembly and the directives of the Council.
2. Subject to paragraph 1, the Enterprise shall enjoy autonomy in the
conduct of its operations.
3. Nothing in this Convention shall make the Enterprise liable for the
acts or obligations of the Authority, or make the Authority liable for
the acts or obligations of the Enterprise.
Article 3
Limitation of liability
Without prejudice to article 11, paragraph 3, of this Annex, no member
114

[Page 115]
of the Authority shall be liable by reason only of its membership for the
acts or obligations of the Enterprise.
Article 4
Structure
The Enterprise shall have a Governing Board, a Director-General and the
staff necessary for the exercise of its functions.
Article 5
Governing Board
1. The Governing Board shall be composed of 15 members elected by
the Assembly in accordance with article 160, paragraph 2(c). In the
election of the members of the Board, due regard shall be paid to
the principle of equitable geographical distribution. In submitting
nominations of candidates for election to the Board, members of
the Authority shall bear in mind the need to nominate candidates of
the highest standard of competence, with qualifications in relevant
fields, so as to ensure the viability and success of the Enterprise.
2. Members of the Board shall be elected for four years and may be re-
elected; and due regard shall be paid to the principle of rotation of
membership.
3. Members of the Board shall continue in office until their successors
are elected. If the office of a member of the Board becomes vacant,
the Assembly shall, in accordance with article 160, paragraph 2(c),
elect a new member for the remainder of his predecessor’s term.
4. Members of the Board shall act in their personal capacity. In the
performance of their duties they shall not seek or receive instructions
from any government or from any other source. Each member of the
Authority shall respect the independent character of the members of
the Board and shall refrain from all attempts to influence any of them
in the discharge of their duties.
5. Each member of the Board shall receive remuneration to be paid out
of the funds of the Enterprise. The amount of remuneration shall be
fixed by the Assembly, upon the recommendation of the Council.
6. The Board shall normally function at the principal office of the
Enterprise and shall meet as often as the business of the Enterprise
may require.
7. Two thirds of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
8. Each member of the Board shall have one vote. All matters before
the Board shall be decided by a majority of its members. If a member
has a conflict of interest on a matter before the Board he shall refrain
115

[Page 116]
from voting on that matter.
9. Any member of the Authority may ask the Board for information in
respect of its operations which particularly affect that member. The
Board shall endeavour to provide such information.
Article 6
Powers and functions of the Governing Board
The Governing Board shall direct the operations of the Enterprise.
Subject to this Convention, the Governing Board shall exercise the powers
necessary to fulfil the purposes of the Enterprise, including powers:
(a) to elect a Chairman from among its members;
(b) to adopt its rules of procedure;
(c) to draw up and submit formal written plans of work to the
Council in accordance with article 153, paragraph 3, and article
162, paragraph 2(j);
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 3, PARAGRAPH 11(B)
11. …
(b) The provisions of article 162, paragraph 2(j), of the
Convention shall not apply.
(d) to develop plans of work and programmes for carrying out the
activities specified in article 170;
(e) to prepare and submit to the Council applications for production
authorizations in accordance with article 151, paragraphs 2 to 7;
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 6, PARAGRAPH 7
7. The provisions of article 151, paragraphs 1 to 7 … of the
Convention shall not apply.
(f) to authorize negotiations concerning the acquisition of
technology, including those provided for in Annex, III, article 5,
paragraph 3(a), (c), and (d), and to approve the results of those
negotiations;
116

[Page 117]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 5, PARAGRAPH 2
2. The provisions of Annex III, article 5, of the Convention shall
not apply.
(g) to establish terms and conditions, and to authorize negotiations,
concerning joint ventures and other forms of joint arrangements
referred to in Annex III, articles 9 and 11, and to approve the
results of such negotiations;
(h) to recommend to the Assembly what portion of the net income
of the Enterprise should be retained as its reserves in accordance
with article 160, paragraph 2(f), and article 10 of this Annex;
(i) to approve the annual budget of the Enterprise;
(j) to authorize the procurement of goods and services in
accordance with article 12, paragraph 3, of this Annex;
(k) to submit an annual report to the Council in accordance with
article 9 of this Annex;
(l) to submit to the Council for the approval of the Assembly draft
rules in respect of the organization, management, appointment
and dismissal of the staff of the Enterprise and to adopt
regulations to give effect to such rules;
(m) to borrow funds and to furnish such collateral or other security
as it may determine in accordance with article 11, paragraph 2,
of this Annex;
(n) to enter into any legal proceedings, agreements and transactions
and to take any other actions in accordance with article 13 of
this Annex;
(o) to delegate, subject to the approval of the Council, any
non-discretionary powers to the Director-General and to its
committees.
Article 7
Director-General and staff of the Enterprise
1. The Assembly shall, upon the recommendation of the Council and
the nomination of the Governing Board, elect the Director-General of
the Enterprise who shall not be a member of the Board. The Director-
General shall hold office for a fixed term, not exceeding five years,
and may be re-elected for further terms.
2. The Director-General shall be the legal representative and chief
executive of the Enterprise and shall be directly responsible to the
Board for the conduct of the operations of the Enterprise. He shall
be responsible for the organization, management, appointment
117

[Page 118]
and dismissal of the staff of the Enterprise in accordance with the
rules and regulations referred to in article 6, subparagraph (1), of
this Annex. He shall participate, without the right to vote, in the
meetings of the Board and may participate, without the right to vote,
in the meetings of the Assembly and the Council when these organs
are dealing with matters concerning the Enterprise.
3. The paramount consideration in the recruitment and employment of
the staff and in the determination of their conditions of service shall
be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency and
of technical competence. Subject to this consideration, due regard
shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on an equitable
geographical basis.
4. In the performance of their duties the Director-General and the staff
shall not seek or receive instructions from any government or from
any other source external to the Enterprise. They shall refrain from any
action which might reflect on their position as international officials
of the Enterprise responsible only to the Enterprise. Each State Party
undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the
responsibilities of the Director-General and the staff and not to seek
to influence them in the discharge of their responsibilities.
5. The responsibilities set forth in article 168, paragraph 2, are equally
applicable to the staff of the Enterprise.
Article 8
Location
The Enterprise shall have its principal office at the seat of the Authority.
The Enterprise may establish other offices and facilities in the territory of
any State Party with the consent of that State Party.
Article 9
Reports and financial statements
1. The Enterprise shall, not later than three months after the end of
each financial year, submit to the Council for its consideration an
annual report containing an audited statement of its accounts and
shall transmit to the Council at appropriate intervals a summary
statement of its financial position and a profit and loss statement
showing the results of its operations.
2. The Enterprise shall publish its annual report and such other reports
as it finds appropriate.
3. All reports and financial statements referred to in this article shall be
distributed to the members of the Authority.
118

[Page 119]
Article 10
Allocation of net income
1. Subject to paragraph 3, the Enterprise shall make payments to the
Authority under Annex III, article 13, or their equivalent.
2. The Assembly shall, upon the recommendation of the Governing
Board, determine what portion of the net income of the Enterprise
shall be retained as reserves of the Enterprise. The remainder shall
be transferred to the Authority.
3. During an initial period required for the Enterprise to become self-
supporting, which shall not exceed 10 years from the commencement
of commercial production by it, the Assembly shall exempt the
Enterprise from the payments referred to in paragraph 1, and shall
leave all of the net income of the Enterprise in its reserves.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 8, PARAGRAPHS 1 AND 2
SECTION 8. FINANCIAL TERMS OF CONTRACTS
1. The following principles shall provide the basis for
establishing rules, regulations and procedures for financial
terms of contracts:
(a) The system of payments to the Authority shall be fair
both to the contractor and to the Authority and shall
provide adequate means of determining compliance
by the contractor with such system;
(b) The rates of payments under the system shall be within
the range of those prevailing in respect of land-based
mining of the same or similar minerals in order to avoid
giving deep seabed miners an artificial competitive
advantage or imposing on them a competitive
disadvantage;
(c) The system should not be complicated and should not
impose major administrative costs on the Authority
or on a contractor. Consideration should be given to
the adoption of a royalty system or a combination
of a royalty and profit-sharing system. If alternative
systems are decided upon, the contractor has the right
to choose the system applicable to its contract. Any
subsequent change in choice between alternative
systems, however, shall be made by agreement
between the Authority and the contractor;
119

[Page 120]
(d) An annual fixed fee shall be payable from the date of
commencement of commercial production. This fee
may be credited against other payments due under
the system adopted in accordance with subparagraph
(c). The amount of the fee shall be established by the
Council;
(e) The system of payments may be revised periodically
in the light of changing circumstances. Any changes
shall be applied in a non-discriminatory manner. Such
changes may apply to existing contracts only at the
election of the contractor. Any subsequent change in
choice between alternative systems shall be made by
agreement between the Authority and the contractor;
(f) Disputes concerning the interpretation or application
of the rules and regulations based on these principles
shall be subject to the dispute settlement procedures
set out in the Convention.
2. The provisions of Annex III, article 13, paragraphs 3 to 10, of
the Convention shall not apply.
Article 11
Finances
1. The funds of the Enterprise shall include:
(a) amounts received from the Authority in accordance with article
173, paragraph 2(b);
(b) voluntary contributions made by States Parties for the purpose
of financing activities of the Enterprise;
(c) amounts borrowed by the Enterprise in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 3;
(d) income of the Enterprise from its operations;
(e) other funds made available to the Enterprise to enable it to
commence operations as soon as possible and to carry out its
functions.
2. (a) The Enterprise shall have the power to borrow funds and to
furnish such collateral or other security as it may determine.
Before making a public sale of its obligations in the financial
markets or currency of a State Party, the Enterprise shall obtain
the approval of that State Party. The total amount of borrowings
shall be approved by the Council upon the recommendation of
the Governing Board.
(b) States Parties shall make every reasonable effort to support
120

[Page 121]
applications by the Enterprise for loans on capital markets and
from international financial institutions.
3. (a) The Enterprise shall be provided with the funds necessary to
explore and exploit one mine site, and to transport, process
and market the minerals recovered therefrom and the nickel,
copper, cobalt and manganese obtained, and to meet its initial
administrative expenses. The amount of the said funds, and
the criteria and factors for its adjustment, shall be included by
the Preparatory Commission in the draft rules, regulations and
procedures of the Authority.
(b) All States Parties shall make available to the Enterprise an amount
equivalent to one half of the funds referred to in subparagraph
(a) by way of long-term interest-free loans in accordance with
the scale of assessments for the United Nations regular budget
in force at the time when the assessments are made, adjusted
to take into account the States which are not members of the
United Nations. Debts incurred by the Enterprise in raising the
other half of the funds shall be guaranteed by all States Parties
in accordance with the same scale.
(c) If the sum of the financial contributions of States Parties is less
than the funds to be provided to the Enterprise under
subparagraph (a), the Assembly shall, at its first session,
consider the extent of the shortfall and adopt by consensus
measures for dealing with this shortfall, taking into account the
obligation of State Parties under subparagraphs (a) and (b) and
any recommendations of the Preparatory Commission.
(d) (i) Each State Party shall, within 60 days after the entry into
force of this Convention, or within 30 days after the deposit
of its instrument of ratification or accession, whichever
is later, deposit with the Enterprise irrevocable, non-
negotiable, non-interest-bearing promissory notes in the
amount of the share of such State Party of interest-free
loans pursuant to subparagraph (b).
(ii) The Board shall prepare, at the earliest practicable date
after this Convention enters into force, and thereafter at
annual or other appropriate intervals, a schedule of the
magnitude and timing of its requirements for the funding
of its administrative expenses and for activities carried
out by the Enterprise in accordance with article 170 and
article 12 of this Annex.
(iii) The States Parties shall, thereupon, be notified by the
Enterprise, through the Authority, of their respective
121

[Page 122]
shares of the funds in accordance with subparagraph (b),
required for such expenses. The Enterprise shall encash
such amounts of the promissory notes as may be required
to meet the expenditure referred to in the schedule with
respect to interest-free loans.
(iv) States Parties shall, upon receipt of the notification, make
available their respective shares of debt guarantees for
the Enterprise in accordance with subparagraph (b).
(e) (i) If the Enterprise so requests, States Parties may provide
debt guarantees in addition to those provided in accordance
with the scale referred to in subparagraph (b).
(ii) In lieu of debt guarantees, a State Party may make a
voluntary contribution to the Enterprise in an amount
equivalent to that portion of the debts which it would
otherwise be liable to guarantee.
(f) Repayment of the interest-bearing loans shall have priority
over the repayment of the interest-free loans. Repayment
of interest-free loans shall be in accordance with a schedule
adopted by the Assembly, upon the recommendation of the
Council and the advice of the Board. In the exercise of this
function the Board shall be guided by the relevant provisions
of the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, which
shall take into account the paramount importance of ensuring
the effective functioning of the Enterprise and, in particular,
ensuring its financial independence.
(g) Funds made available to the Enterprise shall be in freely usable
currencies or currencies which are freely available and effectively
usable in the major foreign exchange markets. These currencies
shall be defined in the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Authority in accordance with prevailing international monetary
practice. Except as provided in paragraph 2, no State Party shall
maintain or impose restrictions on the holding, use or exchange
by the Enterprise of these funds.
(h) “Debt guarantee” means a promise of a State Party to creditors
of the Enterprise to pay, pro rata in accordance with the
appropriate scale, the financial obligations of the Enterprise
covered by the guarantee following notice by the creditors to
the State Party of a default by the Enterprise. Procedures for the
payment of those obligations shall be in conformity with the
rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority.
122

[Page 123]
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 2, PARAGRAPH 3
3. The obligation of States Parties to fund one mine site of the
Enterprise as provided for in Annex IV, article 11, paragraph
3, of the Convention shall not apply and States Parties shall
be under no obligation to finance any of the operations in
any mine site of the Enterprise or under its joint-venture
arrangements.
4. The funds, assets and expenses of the Enterprise shall be kept
separate from those of the Authority. This article shall not prevent
the Enterprise from making arrangements with the Authority
regarding facilities, personnel and services and arrangements for
reimbursement of administrative expenses paid by either on behalf
of the other.
5. The records, books and accounts of the Enterprise, including
its annual financial statements, shall be audited annually by an
independent auditor appointed by the Council.
Article 12
Operations
1. The Enterprise shall propose to the Council projects for carrying out
activities in accordance with article 170. Such proposals shall include
a formal written plan of work for activities in the Area in accordance
with article 153, paragraph 3, and all such other information and
data as may be required from time to time for its appraisal by the
Legal and Technical Commission and approval by the Council.
2. Upon approval by the Council, the Enterprise shall execute the
project on the basis of the formal written plan of work referred to in
paragraph 1.
3. (a) If the Enterprise does not possess the goods and services required
for its operations it may procure them. For that purpose, it
shall issue invitations to tender and award contracts to bidders
offering the best combination of quality, price and delivery time.
(b) If there is more than one bid offering such a combination, the
contract shall be awarded in accordance with:
(i) the principle of non-discrimination on the basis of political
or other considerations not relevant to the carrying out of
operations with due diligence and efficiency; and
(ii) guidelines approved by the Council with regard to
the preferences to be accorded to goods and services
123

[Page 124]
originating in developing States, including the land-
locked and geographically disadvantaged among them.
(c) The Governing Board may adopt rules determining the special
circumstances in which the requirement of invitations to bid
may, in the best interests of the Enterprise, be dispensed with.
4. The Enterprise shall have title to all minerals and processed
substances produced by it.
5. The Enterprise shall sell its products on a non-discriminatory basis. It
shall not give non-commercial discounts.
6. Without prejudice to any general or special power conferred on
the Enterprise under any other provision of this Convention, the
Enterprise shall exercise such powers incidental to its business as
shall be necessary.
7. The Enterprise shall not interfere in the political affairs of any State
Party; nor shall it be influenced in its decisions by the political character
of the State Party concerned. Only commercial considerations
shall be relevant to its decisions, and these considerations shall be
weighed impartially in order to carry out the purposes specified in
article 1 of this Annex.
AGREEMENT, ANNEX, SECTION 2, PARAGRAPHS 2, 3, 4, 5 AND 6
2. The Enterprise shall conduct its initial deep seabed mining
operations through joint ventures. Upon the approval of
a plan of work for exploitation for an entity other than the
Enterprise, or upon receipt by the Council of an application
for a joint-venture operation with the Enterprise, the Council
shall take up the issue of the functioning of the Enterprise
independently of the Secretariat of the Authority. If joint-
venture operations with the Enterprise accord with sound
commercial principles, the Council shall issue a directive
pursuant to article 170, paragraph 2, of the Convention
providing for such independent functioning.
3. The obligation of States Parties to fund one mine site of the
Enterprise as provided for in Annex IV, article 11, paragraph
3, of the Convention shall not apply and States Parties shall
be under no obligation to finance any of the operations in
any mine site of the Enterprise or under its joint-venture
arrangements.
4. The obligations applicable to contractors shall apply to
the Enterprise. Notwithstanding the provisions of article
153, paragraph 3, and Annex III, article 3, paragraph 5, of
124

[Page 125]
the Convention, a plan of work for the Enterprise upon
its approval shall be in the form of a contract concluded
between the Authority and the Enterprise.
5. A contractor which has contributed a particular area to the
Authority as a reserved area has the right of first refusal to
enter into a joint-venture arrangement with the Enterprise
for exploration and exploitation of that area. If the
Enterprise does not submit an application for a plan of work
for activities in respect of such a reserved area within 15
years of the commencement of its functions independent
of the Secretariat of the Authority or within 15 years of
the date on which that area is reserved for the Authority,
whichever is the later, the contractor which contributed the
area shall be entitled to apply for a plan of work for that area
provided it offers in good faith to include the Enterprise as a
joint-venture partner.
6. Article 170, paragraph 4, Annex IV and other provisions
of the Convention relating to the Enterprise shall be
interpreted and applied in accordance with this section.
Article 13
Legal status, privileges and immunities
1. To enable the Enterprise to exercise its functions, the status,
privileges and immunities set forth in this article shall be accorded
to the Enterprise in the territories of States Parties. To give effect to
this principle the Enterprise and States Parties may, where necessary,
enter into special agreements.
2. The Enterprise shall have such legal capacity as is necessary for the
exercise of its functions and the fulfilment of its purposes and, in
particular, the capacity:
(a) to enter into contracts, joint arrangements or other
arrangements, including agreements with States and
international organizations;
(b) to acquire, lease, hold and dispose of immovable and movable
property;
(c) to be a party to legal proceedings.
3. (a) Actions may be brought against the Enterprise only in a court of
competent jurisdiction in the territory of a State Party in which
the Enterprise:
(i) has an office or facility;
(ii) has appointed an agent for the purpose of accepting
125

[Page 126]
service or notice of process;
(iii) has entered into a contract for goods or services;
(iv) has issued securities; or
(v) is otherwise engaged in commercial activity.
(b) The property and assets of the Enterprise, wherever located and
by whomsoever held, shall be immune from all forms of seizure,
attachment or execution before the delivery of final judgment
against the Enterprise.
4. (a) The property and assets of the Enterprise, wherever located and
by whomsoever held, shall be immune from requisition,
confiscation, expropriation or any other form of seizure by
executive or legislative action.
(b) The property and assets of the Enterprise, wherever located by
whomsoever held, shall be free from discriminatory restrictions,
regulations, controls and moratoria of any nature.
(c) The Enterprise and its employees shall respect local laws and
regulations in any State or territory in which the Enterprise or its
employees may do business or otherwise act.
(d) States Parties shall ensure that the Enterprise enjoys all rights,
privileges and immunities accorded by them to entities
conducting commercial activities in their territories. These
rights, privileges and immunities shall be accorded to the
Enterprise on no less favourable a basis than that on which
they are accorded to entities engaged in similar commercial
activities. If special privileges are provided by States Parties for
developing States or their commercial entities, the Enterprise
shall enjoy those privileges on a similarly preferential basis.
(e) States Parties may provide special incentives, rights, privileges
and immunities to the Enterprise without the obligation to
provide such incentives, rights, privileges and immunities to
other commercial entities.
5. The Enterprise shall negotiate with the host countries in which its
offices and facilities are located for exemption from direct and
indirect taxation.
6. Each State Party shall take such action as is necessary for giving effect
in terms of its own law to the principles set forth in this Annex and
shall inform the Enterprise of the specific action which it has taken.
7. The Enterprise may waive any of the privileges and immunities
conferred under this article or in the special agreements referred to
in paragraph 1 to such extent and upon such conditions as it may
determine.
126

[Page 127]
RESOLUTION II
GOVERNING PREPARATORY INVESTMENT IN PIONEER
ACTIVITIES RELATING TO POLYMETALLIC NODULES
The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,
Having adopted the Convention on the Law of the Sea (the “Convention”),
Having established by resolution I the Preparatory Commission for the
International Seabed Authority and for the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea (the “Commission”) and directed it to prepare draft
rules, regulations and procedures, as necessary to enable the Authority
to commence its functions, as well as to make recommendations for the
early entry into effective operation of the Enterprise,
Desirous of making provision for investments by States and other
entities made in a manner compatible with the international regime set
forth in Part XI of the Convention and the Annexes relating thereto, before
the entry into force of the Convention,
Recognizing the need to ensure that the Enterprise will be provided with
the funds, technology and expertise necessary to enable it to keep pace
with the States and other entities referred to in the preceding paragraph
with respect to activities in the Area,
Decides as follows:
1. For the purposes of this resolution:
(a) “pioneer investor” refers to:
(i) France, India, Japan and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, or a state enterprise of each of those States
or one natural or juridical person which possesses the
nationality of or is effectively controlled by each of
those States, or their nationals, provided that the State
concerned signs the Convention and the State or state
enterprise or natural or juridical person has expended,
before 1 January 1983, an amount equivalent to at
least $US 30 million (United States dollars calculated in
constant dollars relative to 1982) in pioneer activities and
has expended no less than 10 per cent of that amount in
127

[Page 128]
the location, survey and evaluation of the area referred to
in paragraph 3(a);
(ii) four entities, whose components being natural or juridical
persons6 possess the nationality of one or more of the
following States, or are effectively controlled by one or
more of them or their nationals: Belgium, Canada, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the United States of America, provided that
the certifying State or States sign the Convention and
the entity concerned has expended, before 1 January
1983, the levels of expenditure for the purpose stated in
subparagraph (i);
(iii) any developing State which signs the Convention or
any state enterprise or natural or juridical person which
possesses the nationality of such State or is effectively
controlled by it or its nationals, or any group of the
foregoing, which, before 1 January 1985, has expended
the levels of expenditure for the purpose stated in
subparagraph (i); The rights of the pioneer investor may
devolve upon its successor in interest.
(b) “pioneer activities” means undertakings, commitments of
financial and other assets, investigations, findings, research,
engineering development and other activities relevant to
the identification, discovery, and systematic analysis and
evaluation of polymetallic nodules and to the determination of
the technical and economic feasibility of exploitation. Pioneer
activities include:
(i) any at-sea observation and evaluation activity which has
as its objective the establishment and documentation of
the nature, shape, concentration, location and grade of
polymetallic nodules and of the environmental, technical
and other appropriate factors which must be taken into
account before exploitation;
(ii) the recovery from the Area of polymetallic nodules
with a view to the designing, fabricating and testing
of equipment which is intended to be used in the
exploitation of polymetallic nodules;
6 For their identity and composition see “Seabed mineral resource development: recent
activities of the international Consortia” and addendum, published by the Department of
International Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations (ST/ESA/107 and Add.1).
128

[Page 129]
(c) “certifying State” means a State which signs the Convention,
standing in the same relation to a pioneer investor as would
a sponsoring State pursuant to Annex III, article 4, of the
Convention and which certifies the levels of expenditure
specified in subparagraph (a);
(d) “polymetallic nodules” means one of the resources of the
Area consisting of any deposit or accretion of nodules, on
or just below the surface of the deep seabed, which contain
manganese, nickel, cobalt and cooper;
(e) “pioneer area” means an area allocated by the Commission to a
pioneer investor for pioneer activities pursuant to this resolution.
A pioneer area shall not exceed 150,000 square kilometres. The
pioneer investor shall relinquish portions of the pioneer area to
revert to the Area, in accordance with the following schedule:
(i) 20 per cent of the area allocated by the end of the third
year from the date of the allocation;
(ii) an additional 10 per cent of the area allocated by the end
of the fifth year from the date of the allocation;
(iii) an additional 20 per cent of the area allocated or such
larger amount as would exceed the exploitation area
decided upon by the Authority in its rules, regulations
and procedures, after eight years from the date of
the allocation of the area or the date of the award of a
production authorization, whichever is earlier;
(f) “Area”, “Authority”, “activities in the Area” and “resources” have
the meanings assigned to those terms in the Convention.
2. As soon as the Commission begins to function, any State which has
signed the Convention may apply to the Commission on its behalf
or on behalf of any state enterprise or entity or natural or juridical
person specified in paragraph 1(a) for registration as a pioneer
investor. The Commission shall register the applicant as a pioneer
investor if the application:
(a) is accompanied, in the case of a State which has signed the
Convention, by a statement certifying the level of expenditure
made in accordance with paragraph 1(a), and, in all other cases,
a certificate concerning such level of expenditure issued by a
certifying State or States; and
(b) is in conformity with the other provisions of this resolution,
including paragraph 5.
3. (a) Every application shall cover a total area which need not be a
single continuous area, sufficiently large and of sufficient
estimated commercial value to allow two mining operations.
129

[Page 130]
The application shall indicate the coordinates of the area
defining the total area and dividing it into two parts of equal
estimated commercial value and shall contain all the data
available to the applicant with respect to both parts of the
area. Such data shall include, inter alia, information relating to
mapping, testing, the density of polymetallic nodules and their
metal content. In dealing with such data, the Commission and
its staff shall act in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Convention and its Annexes concerning the confidentiality
of data.
(b) Within 45 days of receiving the data required by subparagraph
(a), the Commission shall designate the part of the area which
is to be reserved in accordance with the Convention for the
conduct of activities in the Area by the Authority through the
Enterprise or in association with developing States. The other
part of the area shall be allocated to the pioneer investor as a
pioneer area.
4. No pioneer investor may be registered in respect of more than one
pioneer area. In the case of a pioneer investor which is made up of
two or more components, none of such components may apply to be
registered as a pioneer investor in its own right or under paragraph
1(a)(iii).
5. (a) Any State which has signed the Convention and which is a
prospective certifying State shall ensure, before making
applications to the Commission under paragraph 2, that areas
in respect of which applications are made do not overlap one
another or areas previously allocated as pioneer areas. The
States concerned shall keep the Commission currently and
fully informed of any efforts to resolve conflicts with respect to
overlapping claims and of the results thereof.
(b) Certifying States shall ensure, before the entry into force of the
Convention, that pioneer activities are conducted in a manner
compatible with it.
(c) The prospective certifying States, including all potential
claimants, shall resolve their conflicts as required under
subparagraph (a) by negotiations within a reasonable period.
If such conflicts have not been resolved by 1 March 1983, the
prospective certifying States shall arrange for the submission
of all such claims to binding arbitration in accordance with
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules to commence not later than 1
May 1983 and to be completed by 1 December 1984. If one
of the States concerned does not wish to participate in the
130

[Page 131]
arbitration, it shall arrange for a juridical person of its nationality
to represent it in the arbitration. The arbitral tribunal may, for
good cause, extend the deadline for the making of the award
for one or more 30-day periods.
(d) In determining the issue as to which applicant involved in a
conflict shall be awarded all or part of each area in conflict, the
arbitral tribunal shall find a solution which is fair and equitable,
having regard, with respect to each applicant involved in the
conflict, to the following factors:
(i) the deposit of the list of relevant coordinates with the
prospective certifying State or States not later than
the date of adoption of the Final Act or 1 January 1983,
whichever is earlier;
(ii) the continuity and extent of past activities relevant to
each area in conflict and to the application area of which
it is a part;
(iii) the date on which each pioneer investor concerned
or predecessor in interest or component organization
thereof commenced activities at sea in the application
area:
(iv) the financial cost of activities measured in constant United
States dollars relevant to each area in conflict and to the
application area of which it is a part; and
(v) the time when those activities were carried out and the
quality of activities.
6. A pioneer investor registered pursuant to this resolution shall, from
the date of registration, have the exclusive right to carry out pioneer
activities in the pioneer area allocated to it.
7. (a) Every applicant for registration as a pioneer investor shall pay
to the Commission a fee of $US 250,000. When the pioneer
investor applies to the Authority for a plan of work for
exploration and exploitation the fee referred to in Annex III,
article 13, paragraph 2, of the Convention shall be $US 250,000.
(b) Every registered pioneer investor shall pay an annual fixed fee
of $US 1 million commencing from the date of the allocation of
the pioneer area. The payments shall be made by the pioneer
investor to the Authority upon the approval of its plan of work
for exploration and exploitation. The financial arrangements
undertaken pursuant to such plan of work shall be adjusted to
take account of the payments made pursuant to this paragraph.
(c) Every registered pioneer investor shall agree to incur periodic
expenditures, with respect to the pioneer area allocated to it,
131

[Page 132]
until approval of its plan of work pursuant to paragraph 8, of
an amount to be determined by the Commission. The amount
should be reasonably related to the size of the pioneer area
and the expenditures which would be expected of a bona
fide operator who intends to bring that area into commercial
production within a reasonable time.
8. (a) Within six months of the entry into force of the Convention and
certification by the Commission in accordance with paragraph
11, of compliance with this resolution, the pioneer investor so
registered shall apply to the Authority for approval of a plan of
work for exploration and exploitation, in accordance with the
Convention. The plan of work in respect of such application
shall comply with and be governed by the relevant provisions
of the Convention and the rules, regulations and procedures of
the Authority, including those on the operational requirements,
the financial requirements and the undertakings concerning
the transfer of technology. Accordingly, the Authority shall
approve such application.
(b) When an application for approval of a plan of work is submitted
by an entity other than a State, pursuant to subparagraph (a), the
certifying State or States shall be deemed to be the sponsoring
State for the purposes of Annex III, article 4, of the Convention,
and shall thereupon assume such obligations.
(c) No plan of work for exploration and exploitation shall
be approved unless the certifying State is a Party to the
Convention. In the case of the entities referred to in paragraph
1(a)(ii), the plan of work for exploration and exploitation shall
not be approved unless all the States whose natural or juridical
persons comprise those entities are Parties to the Convention.
If any such State fails to ratify the Convention within six months
after it has received a notification from the Authority that an
application by it, or sponsored by it, is pending, its status as a
pioneer investor or certifying State, as the case may be, shall
terminate, unless the Council, by a majority of three fourths
of its members present and voting, decides to postpone the
terminal date for a period not exceeding six months.
9. (a) In the allocation of production authorizations, in accordance
with article 151 and Annex III, article 7, of the Convention, the
pioneer investors who have obtained approval of plans of
work for exploration and exploitation shall have priority over
all applicants other than the Enterprise which shall be entitled
to production authorizations for two mine sites including
132

[Page 133]
that referred to in article 151, paragraph 5, of the Convention.
After each of the pioneer investors has obtained production
authorization for its first mine site, the priority for the Enterprise
contained in Annex III, article 7, paragraph 6, of the Convention
shall apply.
(b) Production authorizations shall be issued to each pioneer
investor within 30 days of the date on which that pioneer
investor notifies the Authority that it will commence commercial
production within five years. If a pioneer investor is unable to
begin production within the period of five years for reasons
beyond its control, it shall apply to the Legal and Technical
Commission for an extension of time. That Commission shall
grant the extension of time, for a period not exceeding five years
and not subject to further extension, if it is satisfied that the
pioneer investor cannot begin on an economically viable basis
at the time originally planned. Nothing in this subparagraph
shall prevent the Enterprise or any other pioneer applicant, who
has notified the Authority that it will commence commercial
production within five years, from being given a priority over
any applicant who has obtained an extension of time under this
subparagraph.
(c) If the Authority, upon being given notice, pursuant to
subparagraph (b), determines that the commencement of
commercial production within five years would exceed the
production ceiling in article 151, paragraphs 2 to 7, of the
Convention, the applicant shall hold a priority over any other
applicant for the award of the next production authorization
allowed by the production ceiling.
(d) If two or more pioneer investors apply for production
authorizations to begin commercial production at the same time
and article 151, paragraphs 2 to 7, of the Convention, would not
permit all such production to commence simultaneously, the
Authority shall notify the pioneer investors concerned. Within
three months of such notification, they shall decide whether
and, if so, to what extent they wish to apportion the allowable
tonnage among themselves.
(e) If, pursuant to subparagraph (d), the pioneer investors
concerned decide not to apportion the available production
among themselves they shall agree on an order of priority for
production authorizations and all subsequent applications for
production authorizations will be granted after those referred
to in this subparagraph have been approved.
133

[Page 134]
(f) If, pursuant to subparagraph (d), the pioneer investors
concerned decide to apportion the available production among
themselves, the Authority shall award each of them a production
authorization for such lesser quantity as they have agreed. In
each case the stated production requirements of the applicant
will be approved and their full production will be allowed as
soon as the production ceiling admits of additional capacity
sufficient for the applicants involved in the competition. All
subsequent applications for production authorizations will
only be granted after the requirements of this subparagraph
have been met and the applicant is no longer subject to the
reduction of production provided for in this subparagraph.
(g) If the parties fail to reach agreement within the stated time
period, the matter shall be decided immediately by the means
provided for in paragraph 5(c) in accordance with the criteria
set forth in Annex III, article 7, paragraphs 3 and 5, of the
Convention.
10. (a) Any rights acquired by entities or natural or juridical persons
which possess the nationality of or are effectively controlled
by a State or States whose status as certifying State has been
terminated, shall lapse unless the pioneer investor changes its
nationality and sponsorship within six months of the date of
such termination, as provided for in subparagraph (b).
(b) A pioneer investor may change its nationality and sponsorship
from that existing at the time of its registration as a pioneer
investor to that of any State Party to the Convention which has
effective control over the pioneer investor in terms of paragraph
1(a).
(c) Changes of nationality and sponsorship pursuant to this
paragraph shall not affect any right or priority conferred on a
pioneer investor pursuant to paragraphs 6 and 8.
11. The Commission shall:
(a) provide each pioneer investor with the certificate of compliance
with the provisions of this resolution referred to in paragraph 8;
and
(b) include in its final report required by paragraph 11 of resolution I
of the Conference details of all registrations of pioneer investors
and allocations of pioneer areas pursuant to this resolution.
12. In order to ensure that the Enterprise is able to carry out activities
in the Area in such a manner as to keep pace with States and other
entities:
(a) every registered pioneer investor shall:
134

[Page 135]
(i) carry out exploration, at the request of the Commission, in
the area reserved, pursuant to paragraph 3 in connection
with its application, for activities in the Area by the
Authority through the Enterprise or in association with
developing States, on the basis that the costs so incurred
plus interest thereon at the rate of 10 per cent per annum
shall be reimbursed;
(ii) provide training at all levels for personnel designated by
the Commission;
(iii) undertake before the entry into force of the Convention,
to perform the obligations prescribed in the Convention
relating to transfer of technology;
(b) every certifying State shall:
(i) ensure that the necessary funds are made available to
the Enterprise in a timely manner in accordance with the
Convention, upon its entry into force; and
(ii) report periodically to the Commission on the activities
carried out by it, by its entities or natural or juridical
persons.
13. The Authority and its organs shall recognize and honour the rights
and obligations arising from this resolution and the decisions of the
Commission taken pursuant to it.
14. Without prejudice to paragraph 13, this resolution shall have effect
until the entry into force of the Convention.
15. Nothing in this resolution shall derogate from Annex III, article 6,
paragraph 3(c), of the Convention.
135

[Page 136]
AGREEMENT RELATING TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PART
XI OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF
THE SEA OF 10 DECEMBER 1982
The States Parties to this Agreement,
Recognizing the important contribution of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (hereinafter
referred to as “the Convention”) to the maintenance of peace, justice and
progress for all peoples of the world,
Reaffirming that the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof, beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as “the Area”), as
well as the resources of the Area, are the common heritage of mankind,
Mindful of the importance of the Convention for the protection and
preservation of the marine environment and of the growing concern for
the global environment,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on the results of the informal consultations among States held
from 1990 to 1994 on outstanding issues relating to Part XI and related
provisions of the Convention (hereinafter referred to as “Part XI”),
Noting the political and economic changes, including market-oriented
approaches, affecting the implementation of Part XI,
Wishing to facilitate universal participation in the Convention,
Considering that an agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI
would best meet that objective,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Implementation of Part XI
1. The States Parties to this Agreement undertake to implement Part XI
in accordance with this Agreement.
2. The Annex forms an integral part of this Agreement.
136

[Page 137]
Article 2
Relationship between this Agreement and Part XI
1. The provisions of this Agreement and Part XI shall be interpreted
and applied together as a single instrument. In the event of any
inconsistency between this Agreement and Part XI, the provisions of
this Agreement shall prevail.
2. Articles 309 to 319 of the Convention shall apply to this Agreement
as they apply to the Convention.
Article 3
Signature
This Agreement shall remain open for signature at United Nations
Headquarters by the States and entities referred to in article 305,
paragraph 1 (a), (c), (d), (e) and (f), of the Convention for 12 months from
the date of its adoption.
Article 4
Consent to be bound
1. After the adoption of this Agreement, any instrument of ratification
or formal confirmation of or accession to the Convention shall also
represent consent to be bound by this Agreement.
2. No State or entity may establish its consent to be bound by this
Agreement unless it has previously established or establishes at the
same time its consent to be bound by the Convention.
3. A State or entity referred to in article 3 may express its consent to be
bound by this Agreement by:
(a) Signature not subject to ratification, formal confirmation or the
procedure set out in article 5;
(b) Signature subject to ratification or formal confirmation, followed
by ratification or formal confirmation;
(c) Signature subject to the procedure set out in article 5; or
(d) Accession.
4. Formal confirmation by the entities referred to in article 305,
paragraph 1 (f), of the Convention shall be in accordance with Annex
IX of the Convention.
5. The instruments of ratification, formal confirmation or accession
shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
137

[Page 138]
Article 5
Simplified procedure
1. A State or entity which has deposited before the date of the
adoption of this Agreement an instrument of ratification or formal
confirmation of or accession to the Convention and which has
signed this Agreement in accordance with article 4, paragraph 3 (c),
shall be considered to have established its consent to be bound by
this Agreement 12 months after the date of its adoption, unless that
State or entity notifies the depositary in writing before that date
that it is not availing itself of the simplified procedure set out in this
article.
2. In the event of such notification, consent to be bound by this
Agreement shall be established in accordance with article 4,
paragraph 3 (b).
Article 6
Entry into force
1. This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days after the date on which
40 States have established their consent to be bound in accordance
with articles 4 and 5, provided that such States include at least seven
of the States referred to in paragraph 1 (a) of resolution II of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (hereinafter
referred to as “resolution II”) and that at least five of those States are
developed States. If these conditions for entry into force are fulfilled
before 16 November 1994, this Agreement shall enter into force on
16 November 1994.
2. For each State or entity establishing its consent to be bound by this
Agreement after the requirements set out in paragraph 1 have been
fulfilled, this Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
following the date of establishment of its consent to be bound.
Article 7
Provisional application
1. If on 16 November 1994 this Agreement has not entered into force, it
shall be applied provisionally pending its entry into force by:
(a) States which have consented to its adoption in the General
Assembly of the United Nations, except any such State which
before 16 November 1994 notifies the depositary in writing
either that it will not so apply this Agreement or that it will
138

[Page 139]
consent to such application only upon subsequent signature or
notification in writing;
(b) States and entities which sign this Agreement, except any such
State or entity which notifies the depositary in writing at the
time of signature that it will not so apply this Agreement;
(c) States and entities which consent to its provisional application
by so notifying the depositary in writing;
(d) States which accede to this Agreement.
2. All such States and entities shall apply this Agreement provisionally in
accordance with their national or internal laws and regulations, with
effect form 16 November 1994 or the date of signature, notification
of consent or accession, if later.
3. Provisional application shall terminate upon the date of entry into
force of this Agreement. In any event, provisional application shall
terminate on 16 November 1998 if at that date the requirement in
article 6, paragraph 1, of consent to be bound by this Agreement by
at least seven of the States (of which at least five must be developed
States) referred to in paragraph 1 (a) of resolution II has not been
fulfilled.
Article 8
States Parties
1. For the purposes of this Agreement, “States Parties” means States
which have consented to be bound by this Agreement and for which
this Agreement is in force.
2. This Agreement applies mutatis mutandis to the entities referred to
in article 305, paragraph 1 (c), (d), (e) and (f), of the Convention which
become Parties to this Agreement in accordance with the conditions
relevant to each, and to that extent “States Parties” refers to those
entities.
Article 9
Depositary
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be the depositary of
this Agreement.
Article 10
Authentic texts
The original of this Agreement, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
139

[Page 140]
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized thereto, have signed this Agreement.
DONE AT NEW YORK, this 28th day of July, one thousand nine hundred
and ninety-four.
ANNEX
SECTION 1. COSTS TO STATES PARTIES AND INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS
1. The International Seabed Authority (hereinafter referred to as “the
Authority”) is the organization through which States Parties to
the Convention shall, in accordance with the regime for the Area
established in Part XI and this Agreement, organize and control
activities in the Area, particularly with a view to administering the
resources of the Area. The powers and functions of the Authority
shall be those expressly conferred upon it by the Convention. The
Authority shall have such incidental powers, consistent with the
Convention, as are implicit in, and necessary for, the exercise of those
powers and functions with respect to activities in the Area.
2. In order to minimize costs to States Parties, all organs and subsidiary
bodies to be established under the Convention and this Agreement
shall be cost-effective. This principle shall also apply to the frequency,
duration and scheduling of meetings.
3. The setting up and the functioning of the organs and subsidiary
bodies of the Authority shall be based on an evolutionary approach,
taking into account the functional needs of the organs and subsidiary
bodies concerned in order that they may discharge effectively their
respective responsibilities at various stages of the development of
activities in the Area.
4. The early functions of the Authority upon entry into force of the
Convention shall be carried out by the Assembly, the Council, the
Secretariat, the Legal and Technical Commission and the Finance
Committee. The functions of the Economic Planning Commission
shall be performed by the Legal and Technical Commission until
140

[Page 141]
such time as the Council decides otherwise or until the approval of
the first plan of work for exploitation.
5. Between the entry into force of the Convention and the approval of
the first plan of work for exploitation, the Authority shall concentrate
on:
(a) Processing of applications for approval of plans of work for
exploration in accordance with Part XI of this Agreement;
(b) Implementation of decisions of the Preparatory Commission
for the International Seabed Authority and for the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (hereinafter referred to as “the
Preparatory Commission”) relating to the registered pioneer
investors and their certifying States, including their rights and
obligations, in accordance with article 308, paragraph 5, of the
Convention and resolution II, paragraph 13;
(c) Monitoring of compliance with plans of work for exploration
approved in the form of contracts;
(d) Monitoring and review of trends and developments relating
to deep seabed mining activities, including regular analysis of
world metal market conditions and metal prices, trends and
prospects;
(e) Study of the potential impact of mineral production from the
Area on the economies of developing land-based producers of
those minerals which are likely to be most seriously affected,
with a view to minimizing their difficulties and assisting them in
their economic adjustment, taking into account the work done
in this regard by the Preparatory Commission;
(f) Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures necessary
for the conduct of activities in the Area as they progress.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Annex III, article 17, paragraph
2 (b) and (c), of the Convention, such rules, regulations and
procedures shall take into account the terms of this Agreement,
the prolonged delay in commercial deep seabed mining and
the likely pace of activities in the Area;
(g) Adoption of rules, regulations and procedures incorporating
applicable standards for the protection and preservation of the
marine environment;
(h) Promotion and encouragement of the conduct of marine
scientific research with respect to activities in the Area and the
collection and dissemination of the results of such research and
analysis, when available, with particular emphasis on research
related to the environmental impact of activities in the Area;
(i) Acquisition of scientific knowledge and monitoring of the
141

[Page 142]
development of marine technology relevant to activities in the
Area, in particular technology relating to the protection and
preservation of the marine environment;
(j) Assessment of available data relating to prospecting and
exploration;
(k) Timely elaboration of rules, regulations and procedures for
exploitation, including those relating to the protection and
preservation of the marine environment.
6. (a) An application for approval of a plan of work for exploration
shall be considered by the Council following the receipt of a
recommendation on the application from the Legal and Technical
Commission. The processing of an application for approval of a plan
of work for exploration shall be in accordance with the provisions of
the Convention, including Annex III thereof, and this Agreement, and
subject to the following:
(i) A plan of work for exploration submitted on behalf
of a State or entity, or any component of such entity,
referred to in resolution II, paragraph 1 (a) (ii) or (iii), other
than a registered pioneer investor, which had already
undertaken substantial activities in the Area prior to the
entry into force of the Convention, or its successor in
interest, shall be considered to have met the financial and
technical qualifications necessary for approval of a plan
of work if the sponsoring State or States certify that the
applicant has expended an amount equivalent to at least
US$30 million in research and exploration activities and
has expended no less than 10 per cent of that amount in
the location, survey and evaluation of the area referred to
in the plan of work. If the plan of work otherwise satisfies
the requirements of the Convention and any rules,
regulations and procedures adopted pursuant thereto, it
shall be approved by the Council in the form of a contract.
The provisions of section 3, paragraph 11, of this Annex
shall be interpreted and applied accordingly;
(ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of resolution II, paragraph
8 (a), a registered pioneer investor may request approval
of a plan of work for exploration within 36 months of the
entry into force of the Convention. The plan of work for
exploration shall consist of documents, reports and other
data submitted to the Preparatory Commission both
before and after registration and shall be accompanied by
a certificate of compliance, consisting of a factual report
142

[Page 143]
describing the status of fulfilment of obligations under
the pioneer investor regime, issued by the Preparatory
Commission in accordance with resolution II, paragraph
11 (a). Such a plan of work shall be considered to be
approved. Such an approved plan of work shall be in the
form of a contract concluded between the Authority and
the registered pioneer investor in accordance with Part XI
and this Agreement. The fee of US$ 250,000 paid pursuant
to resolution II, paragraph 7 (a), shall be deemed to be the
fee relating to the exploration phase pursuant to section
8, paragraph 3, of this Annex. Section 3, paragraph 11, of
this Annex shall be interpreted and applied accordingly;
(iii) In accordance with the principle of non-discrimination, a
contract with a State or entity or any component of such
entity referred to in subparagraph (a) (i) shall include
arrangements which shall be similar to and no less
favorable than those agreed with any registered pioneer
investor referred to in subparagraph (a) (ii). If any of the
States or entities or any components of such entities
referred to in subparagraph (a) (i) are granted more
favorable arrangements, the Council shall make similar
and no less favorable arrangements with regard to the
rights and obligations assumed by the registered pioneer
investors referred to in subparagraph (a) (ii), provided that
such arrangements do not affect or prejudice the interests
of the Authority;
(iv) A State sponsoring an application for a plan of work
pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph (a) (i) or (ii)
may be a State Party or a State which is applying this
Agreement provisionally in accordance with article 7, or a
State which is a member of the Authority on a provisional
basis in accordance with paragraph 12;
(v) Resolution II, paragraph 8 (c), shall be interpreted and
applied in accordance with subparagraph (a) (iv).
(b) The approval of a plan of work for exploration shall be in
accordance with article 153, paragraph 3, of the Convention.
7. An application for approval of a plan of work shall be accompanied
by an assessment of the potential environmental impacts of the
proposed activities and by a description of a programme for
oceanographic and baseline environmental studies in accordance
with the rules, regulations and procedures adopted by the Authority.
8. An application for approval of a plan of work for exploration, subject
143

[Page 144]
to paragraph 6 (a) (i) or (ii), shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures set out in section 3, paragraph 11, of this annex.
9. A plan of work for exploration shall be approved for a period of 15
years. Upon the expiration of a plan of work for exploration, the
contractor shall apply for a plan of work for exploitation unless
the contractor has already done so or has obtained an extension
for the plan of work for exploration. Contractors may apply for
such extensions for periods of not more than five years each. Such
extensions shall be approved if the contractor has made efforts in
good faith to comply with the requirements of the plan of work
but for reasons beyond the contractor’s control has been unable
to complete the necessary preparatory work for proceeding to the
exploitation stage or if the prevailing economic circumstances do
not justify proceeding to the exploitation stage.
10. Designation of a reserved area for the Authority in accordance with
Annex III, article 8, of the Convention shall take place in connection
with approval of an application for a plan of work for exploration
or approval of an application for a plan of work for exploration and
exploitation.
11. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 9, an approved plan
of work for exploration which is sponsored by at least one State
provisionally applying this Agreement shall terminate if such a State
ceases to apply this Agreement provisionally and has not become a
member on a provisional basis in accordance with paragraph 12 or
has not become a State Party.
12. Upon the entry into force of this Agreement, States and entities
referred to in article 3 of this Agreement which have been applying
it provisionally in accordance with article 7 and for which it is not in
force may continue to be members of the Authority on a provisional
basis pending its entry into force for such States and entities, in
accordance with the following subparagraphs:
(a) If this Agreement enters into force before 16 November
1996, such States and entities shall be entitled to continue to
participate as members of the Authority on a provisional basis
upon notification to the depositary of the Agreement by such
a State or entity of its intention to participate as a member on
a provisional basis. Such membership shall terminate either
on 16 November 1996 or upon the entry into force of this
Agreement and the Convention for such member, whichever is
earlier. The Council may, upon the request of the State or entity
concerned, extend such membership beyond 16 November
1996 for a further period or periods not exceeding a total of
144

[Page 145]
two years provided that the Council is satisfied that the State
or entity concerned has been making efforts in good faith to
become a party to the Agreement and the Convention;
(b) If this Agreement enters into force after 15 November 1996,
such States and entities may request the Council to grant
continued membership in the Authority on a provisional basis
for a period or periods not extending beyond 16 November
1998. The Council shall grant such membership with effect
from the date of the request if it is satisfied that the State or
entity has been making efforts in good faith to become a party
to the Agreement and the Convention;
(c) States and entities which are members of the Authority on a
provisional basis in accordance with subparagraph (a) or (b) shall
apply the terms of Part XI and this Agreement in accordance
with their national or internal laws, regulations and annual
budgetary appropriations and shall have the same rights and
obligations as other members, including:
(i) The obligation to contribute to the administrative budget
of the Authority in accordance with the scale of assessed
contributions;
(ii) The right to sponsor an application for approval of a plan
of work for exploration. In the case of entities whose
components are natural or juridical persons possessing
the nationality of more than one State, a plan of work for
exploration shall not be approved unless all the States
whose natural or juridical persons comprise those entities
are States Parties or members on a provisional basis;
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 9, an approved
plan of work in the form of a contract for exploration which was
sponsored pursuant to subparagraph (c) (ii) by a State which
was a member on a provisional basis shall terminate if such
membership ceases and the State or entity has not become a
State Party;
(e) If such a member has failed to make its assessed contributions
or otherwise failed to comply with its obligations in accordance
with this paragraph, its membership on a provisional basis shall
be terminated.
13. The reference in Annex III, article 10, of the Convention to
performance which has not been satisfactory shall be interpreted to
mean that the contractor has failed to comply with the requirements
of an approved plan of work in spite of a written warning or warnings
from the Authority to the contractor to comply therewith.
145

[Page 146]
14. The Authority shall have its own budget. Until the end of the year
following the year during which this Agreement enters into force,
the administrative expenses of the Authority shall be met through
the budget of the United Nations. Thereafter, the administrative
expenses of the Authority shall be met by assessed contributions
of its members, including any members on a provisional basis, in
accordance with articles 171, subparagraph (a), and 173 of the
Convention and this Agreement, until the Authority has sufficient
funds from other sources to meet those expenses. The Authority
shall not exercise the power referred to in article 174, paragraph 1, of
the Convention to borrow funds to finance its administrative budget.
15. The Authority shall elaborate and adopt, in accordance with article
162, paragraph 2 (o) (ii), of the Convention, rules, regulations and
procedures based on the principles contained in sections 2, 5, 6, 7
and 8 of this Annex, as well as any additional rules, regulations and
procedures necessary to facilitate the approval of plans of work
for exploration or exploitation, in accordance with the following
subparagraphs:
(a) The Council may undertake such elaboration any time it deems
that all or any of such rules, regulations or procedures are
required for the conduct of activities in the Area, or when it
determines that commercial exploitation is imminent, or at the
request of a State whose national intends to apply for approval
of a plan of work for exploitation;
(b) If a request is made by a State referred to in subparagraph (a)
the Council shall, in accordance with article 162, paragraph 2
(o), of the Convention, complete the adoption of such rules,
regulations and procedures within two years of the request;
(c) If the Council has not completed the elaboration of the rules,
regulations and procedures relating to exploitation within the
prescribed time and an application for approval of a plan of
work for exploitation is pending, it shall none the less consider
and provisionally approve such plan of work based on the
provisions of the Convention and any rules, regulations and
procedures that the Council may have adopted provisionally,
or on the basis of the norms contained in the Convention and
the terms and principles contained in this Annex as well as the
principle of non-discrimination among contractors.
16. The draft rules, regulations and procedures and any recommendations
relating to the provisions of Part XI, as contained in the reports and
recommendations of the Preparatory Commission, shall be taken
into account by the Authority in the adoption of rules, regulations
146

[Page 147]
and procedures in accordance with Part XI and this Agreement.
17. The relevant provisions of Part XI, section 4, of the Convention shall
be interpreted and applied in accordance with this Agreement.
SECTION 2. THE ENTERPRISE
1. The Secretariat of the Authority shall perform the functions of the
Enterprise until it begins to operate independently of the Secretariat.
The Secretary-General of the Authority shall appoint from within
the staff of the Authority an interim Director-General to oversee the
performance of these functions by the Secretariat.
These functions shall be:
(a) Monitoring and review of trends and developments relating
to deep seabed mining activities, including regular analysis of
world metal market conditions and metal prices, trends and
prospects;
(b) Assessment of the results of the conduct of marine scientific
research with respect to activities in the Area, with particular
emphasis on research related to the environmental impact of
activities in the Area;
(c) Assessment of available data relating to prospecting and
exploration, including the criteria for such activities;
(d) Assessment of technological developments relevant to activities
in the Area, in particular technology relating to the protection
and preservation of the marine environment;
(e) Evaluation of information and data relating to areas reserved for
the Authority;
(f) Assessment of approaches to joint-venture operations;
(g) Collection of information on the availability of trained
manpower;
(h) Study of managerial policy options for the administration of the
Enterprise at different stages of its operations.
2. The Enterprise shall conduct its initial deep seabed mining operations
through joint ventures. Upon the approval of a plan of work for
exploitation for an entity other than the Enterprise, or upon receipt
by the Council of an application for a joint-venture operation with
the Enterprise, the Council shall take up the issue of the functioning
of the Enterprise independently of the Secretariat of the Authority.
If joint-venture operations with the Enterprise accord with sound
commercial principles, the Council shall issue a directive pursuant
to article 170, paragraph 2, of the Convention providing for such
independent functioning.
147

[Page 148]
3. The obligation of States Parties to fund one mine site of the Enterprise
as provided for in Annex IV, article 11, paragraph 3, of the Convention
shall not apply and States Parties shall be under no obligation to
finance any of the operations in any mine site of the Enterprise or
under its joint-venture arrangements.
4. The obligations applicable to contractors shall apply to the
Enterprise. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 153, paragraph
3, and Annex III, article 3, paragraph 5, of the Convention, a plan of
work for the Enterprise upon its approval shall be in the form of a
contract concluded between the Authority and the Enterprise.
5. A contractor which has contributed a particular area to the Authority
as a reserved area has the right of first refusal to enter into a joint-
venture arrangement with the Enterprise for exploration and
exploitation of that area. If the Enterprise does not submit an
application for a plan of work for activities in respect of such a
reserved area within 15 years of the commencement of its functions
independent of the Secretariat of the Authority or within 15 years of
the date on which that area is reserved for the Authority, whichever is
the later, the contractor which contributed the area shall be entitled
to apply for a plan of work for that area provided it offers in good
faith to include the Enterprise as a joint-venture partner.
6. Article 170, paragraph 4, Annex IV and other provisions of the
Convention relating to the Enterprise shall be interpreted and
applied in accordance with this section.
SECTION 3. DECISION-MAKING
1. The general policies of the Authority shall be established by the
Assembly in collaboration with the Council.
2. As a general rule, decision-making in the organs of the Authority
should be by consensus.
3. If all efforts to reach a decision by consensus have been exhausted,
decisions by voting in the Assembly on questions of procedure
shall be taken by a majority of members present and voting, and
decisions on questions of substance shall be taken by a two-thirds
majority of members present and voting, as provided for in article
159, paragraph 8, of the Convention.
4. Decisions of the Assembly on any matter for which the Council also
has competence or on any administrative, budgetary or financial
matter shall be based on the recommendations of the Council. If
the Assembly does not accept the recommendation of the Council
on any matter, it shall return the matter to the Council for further
148

[Page 149]
consideration. The Council shall reconsider the matter in the light of
the views expressed by the Assembly.
5. If all efforts to reach a decision by consensus have been exhausted,
decisions by voting in the Council on questions of procedure shall be
taken by a majority of members present and voting, and decisions
on questions of substance, except where the Convention provides
for decisions by consensus in the Council, shall be taken by a two-
thirds majority of members present and voting, provided that such
decisions are not opposed by a majority in any one of the Chambers
referred to in paragraph 9. In taking decisions the Council shall seek
to promote the interests of all the members of the Authority.
6. The Council may defer the taking of a decision in order to facilitate
further negotiation whenever it appears that all efforts at achieving
consensus on a question have not been exhausted.
7. Decisions by the Assembly or the Council having financial or
budgetary implications shall be based on the recommendations of
the Finance Committee.
8. The provisions of article 161, paragraph 8 (b) and (c), of the Convention
shall not apply.
9. (a) Each group of States elected under paragraph 15 (a) to (c) shall be
treated as a chamber for the purposes of voting in the Council.
The developing States elected under paragraph 15 (d) and (e)
shall be treated as a single chamber for the purposes of voting
in the Council.
(b) Before electing the members of the Council, the Assembly shall
establish lists of countries fulfilling the criteria for membership
in the groups of States in paragraph 15 (a) to (d). If a State fulfils
the criteria for membership in more than one group, it may only
be proposed by one group for election to the Council and it
shall represent only that group in voting in the Council.
10. Each group of States in paragraph 15 (a) to (d) shall be represented
in the Council by those members nominated by that group. Each
group shall nominate only as many candidates as the number of seats
required to be filled by that group. When the number of potential
candidates in each of the groups referred to in paragraph 15 (a) to
(e) exceeds the number of seats available in each of those respective
groups, as a general rule, the principle of rotation shall apply. States
members of each of those groups shall determine how this principle
shall apply in those groups.
11. (a) The Council shall approve a recommendation by the Legal and
Technical Commission for approval of a plan of work unless
by a two-thirds majority of its members present and voting,
149

[Page 150]
including a majority of members present and voting in each of
the chambers of the Council, the Council decides to disapprove
a plan of work. If the Council does not take a decision on
a recommendation for approval of a plan of work within a
prescribed period, the recommendation shall be deemed to
have been approved by the Council at the end of that period.
The prescribed period shall normally be 60 days unless the
Council decides to provide for a longer period. If the Commission
recommends the disapproval of a plan of work or does not make
a recommendation, the Council may nevertheless approve
the plan of work in accordance with its rules of procedure for
decision-making on questions of substance.
(b) The provisions of article 162, paragraph 2 (j), of the Convention
shall not apply.
12. Where a dispute arises relating to the disapproval of a plan of work,
such dispute shall be submitted to the dispute settlement procedures
set out in the Convention.
13. Decisions by voting in the Legal and Technical Commission shall be
by a majority of members present and voting.
14. Part XI, section 4, subsections B and C, of the Convention shall be
interpreted and applied in accordance with this section.
15. The Council shall consist of 36 members of the Authority elected by
the Assembly in the following order:
(a) Four members from among those States Parties which, during
the last five years for which statistics are available, have either
consumed more than 2 per cent in value terms of total world
consumption or have had net imports of more than 2 per cent in
value terms of total world imports of the commodities produced
from the categories of minerals to be derived from the Area,
provided that the four members shall include one State from
the Eastern European region having the largest economy in that
region in terms of gross domestic product and the State, on the
date of entry into force of the Convention, having the largest
economy in terms of gross domestic product, if such States wish
to be represented in this group;
(b) Four members from among the eight States Parties which have
made the largest investments in preparation for and in the
conduct of activities in the Area, either directly or through their
nationals;
(c) Four members from among States Parties which, on the basis
of production in areas under their jurisdiction, are major net
exporters of the categories of minerals to be derived from the
150

[Page 151]
Area, including at least two developing States whose exports of
such minerals have a substantial bearing upon their economies;
(d) Six members from among developing States Parties, representing
special interests. The special interests to be represented shall
include those of States with large populations, States which
are land-locked or geographically disadvantaged, island States,
States which are major importers of the categories of minerals to
be derived from the Area, States which are potential producers
of such minerals and least developed States;
(e) Eighteen members elected according to the principle of
ensuring an equitable geographical distribution of seats in the
Council as a whole, provided that each geographical region shall
have at least one member elected under this subparagraph.
For this purpose, the geographical regions shall be Africa, Asia,
Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean and Western
Europe and Others.
16. The provisions of article 161, paragraph 1, of the Convention shall
not apply.
SECTION 4. REVIEW CONFERENCE
The provisions relating to the Review Conference in article 155,
paragraphs 1, 3 and 4, of the Convention shall not apply. Notwithstanding
the provisions of article 314, paragraph 2, of the Convention, the
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Council, may undertake at any
time a review of the matters referred to in article 155, paragraph 1, of the
Convention. Amendments relating to this Agreement and Part XI shall be
subject to the procedures contained in articles 314, 315 and 316 of the
Convention, provided that the principles, regime and other terms referred
to in article 155, paragraph 2, of the Convention shall be maintained and
the rights referred to in paragraph 5 of that article shall not be affected.
SECTION 5. TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY
1. In addition to the provisions of article 144 of the Convention, transfer
of technology for the purposes of Part XI shall be governed by the
following principles:
(a) The Enterprise, and developing States wishing to obtain deep
seabed mining technology, shall seek to obtain such technology
on fair and reasonable commercial terms and conditions on the
open market, or through joint-venture arrangements;
(b) If the Enterprise or developing States are unable to obtain deep
151

[Page 152]
seabed mining technology, the Authority may request all or
any of the contractors and their respective sponsoring State
or States to cooperate with it in facilitating the acquisition of
deep seabed mining technology by the Enterprise or its joint
venture, or by a developing State or States seeking to acquire
such technology on fair and reasonable commercial terms and
conditions, consistent with the effective protection of intellectual
property rights. States Parties undertake to cooperate fully and
effectively with the Authority for this purpose and to ensure
that contractors sponsored by them also cooperate fully with
the Authority;
(c) As a general rule, States Parties shall promote international
technical and scientific cooperation with regard to activities in
the Area either between the parties concerned or by develop-
ing training, technical assistance and scientific cooperation pro-
grammes in marine science and technology and the protection
and preservation of the marine environment.
2. The provisions of Annex III, article 5, of the Convention shall not
apply.
SECTION 6. PRODUCTION POLICY
1. The production policy of the Authority shall be based on the follow-
ing principles:
(a) Development of the resources of the Area shall take place in
accordance with sound commercial principles;
(b) The provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,
its relevant codes and successor or superseding agreements
shall apply with respect to activities in the Area;
(c) In particular, there shall be no subsidization of activities in the
Area except as may be permitted under the agreements referred
to in subparagraph (b). Subsidization for the purpose of these
principles shall be defined in terms of the agreements referred
to in subparagraph (b);
(d) There shall be no discrimination between minerals derived from
the Area and from other sources. There shall be no preferential
access to markets for such minerals or for imports of commodi-
ties produced from such minerals, in particular:
(i) By the use of tariff or non-tariff barriers; and
(ii) Given by States Parties to such minerals or commodities
produced by their state enterprises or by natural or jurid-
ical persons which possess their nationality or are con-
152

[Page 153]
trolled by them or their nationals;
(e) The plan of work for exploitation approved by the Authority in
respect of each mining area shall indicate an anticipated pro-
duction schedule which shall include the estimated maximum
amounts of minerals that would be produced per year under
the plan of work;
(f) The following shall apply to the settlement of disputes
concerning the provisions of the agreements referred to in
subparagraph (b):
(i) Where the States Parties concerned are parties to such
agreements, they shall have recourse to the dispute
settlement procedures of those agreements;
(ii) Where one or more of the States Parties concerned are
not parties to such agreements, they shall have recourse
to the dispute settlement procedures set out in the
Convention;
(g) In circumstances where a determination is made under the
agreements referred to in subparagraph (b) that a State Party
has engaged in subsidization which is prohibited or has resulted
in adverse effects on the interests of another State Party and
appropriate steps have not been taken by the relevant State
Party or States Parties, a State Party may request the Council to
take appropriate measures.
2. The principles contained in paragraph 1 shall not affect the rights
and obligations under any provision of the agreements referred to in
paragraph 1 (b), as well as the relevant free trade and customs union
agreements, in relations between States Parties which are parties to
such agreements.
3. The acceptance by a contractor of subsidies other than those which
may be permitted under the agreements referred to in paragraph
1 (b) shall constitute a violation of the fundamental terms of the
contract forming a plan of work for the carrying out of activities in
the Area.
4. Any State Party which has reason to believe that there has been a
breach of the requirements of paragraphs 1 (b) to (d) or 3 may initiate
dispute settlement procedures in conformity with paragraph 1 (f) or
(g).
5. A State Party may at any time bring to the attention of the Council
activities which in its view are inconsistent with the requirements of
paragraph 1 (b) to (d).
6. The Authority shall develop rules, regulations and procedures
which ensure the implementation of the provisions of this section,
153

[Page 154]
including relevant rules, regulations and procedures governing the
approval of plans of work.
7. The provisions of article 151, paragraphs 1 to 7 and 9, article 162,
paragraph 2 (q), article 165, paragraph 2 (n), and Annex III, article 6,
paragraph 5, and article 7, of the Convention shall not apply.
SECTION 7. ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
1. The policy of the Authority of assisting developing countries which
suffer serious adverse effects on their export earnings or economies
resulting from a reduction in the price of an affected mineral or in the
volume of exports of that mineral, to the extent that such reduction
is caused by activities in the Area, shall be based on the following
principles:
(a) The Authority shall establish an economic assistance fund from
a portion of the funds of the Authority which exceeds those
necessary to cover the administrative expenses of the Authority.
The amount set aside for this purpose shall be determined by
the Council from time to time, upon the recommendation of
the Finance Committee. Only funds from payments received
from contractors, including the Enterprise, and voluntary
contributions shall be used for the establishment of the
economic assistance fund;
(b) Developing land-based producer States whose economies have
been determined to be seriously affected by the production
of minerals from the deep seabed shall be assisted from the
economic assistance fund of the Authority;
(c) The Authority shall provide assistance from the fund to affected
developing land-based producer States, where appropriate,
in cooperation with existing global or regional development
institutions which have the infrastructure and expertise to carry
out such assistance programmes;
(d) The extent and period of such assistance shall be determined
on a case-by-case basis. In doing so, due consideration shall be
given to the nature and magnitude of the problems encountered
by affected developing land-based producer States.
2. Article 151, paragraph 10, of the Convention shall be implemented by
means of measures of economic assistance referred to in paragraph
1. Article 160, paragraph 2 (l), article 162, paragraph 2 (n), article
164, paragraph 2 (d), article 171, subparagraph (f), and article 173,
paragraph 2 (c), of the Convention shall be interpreted accordingly.
154

[Page 155]
SECTION 8. FINANCIAL TERMS OF CONTRACTS
1. The following principles shall provide the basis for establishing rules,
regulations and procedures for financial terms of contracts:
(a) The system of payments to the Authority shall be fair both to
the contractor and to the Authority and shall provide adequate
means of determining compliance by the contractor with such
system;
(b) The rates of payments under the system shall be within the
range of those prevailing in respect of land-based mining of the
same or similar minerals in order to avoid giving deep seabed
miners an artificial competitive advantage or imposing on them
a competitive disadvantage;
(c) The system should not be complicated and should not impose
major administrative costs on the Authority or on a contractor.
Consideration should be given to the adoption of a royalty
system or a combination of a royalty and profit-sharing system.
If alternative systems are decided upon, the contractor has
the right to choose the system applicable to its contract. Any
subsequent change in choice between alternative systems,
however, shall be made by agreement between the Authority
and the contractor;
(d) An annual fixed fee shall be payable from the date of
commencement of commercial production. This fee may be
credited against other payments due under the system adopted
in accordance with subparagraph (c). The amount of the fee
shall be established by the Council;
(e) The system of payments may be revised periodically in the
light of changing circumstances. Any changes shall be applied
in a non-discriminatory manner. Such changes may apply to
existing contracts only at the election of the contractor. Any
subsequent change in choice between alternative systems
shall be made by agreement between the Authority and the
contractor;
(f) Disputes concerning the interpretation or application of the
rules and regulations based on these principles shall be subject
to the dispute settlement procedures set out in the Convention.
2. The provisions of Annex III, article 13, paragraph 3 to 10, of the
Convention shall not apply.
3. With regard to the implementation of Annex III, article 13, paragraph
2, of the Convention, the fee for processing applications for approval
155

[Page 156]
of a plan of work limited to one phase, either the exploration phase
or the exploitation phase, shall be US$ 250,000.
SECTION 9. THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
1. There is hereby established a Finance Committee. The Committee
shall be composed of 15 members with appropriate qualifications
relevant to financial matters. States Parties shall nominate candidates
of the highest standards of competence and integrity.
2. No two members of the Finance Committee shall be nationals of the
same State Party.
3. Members of the Finance Committee shall be elected by the
Assembly and due account shall be taken of the need for equitable
geographical distribution and the representation of special interests.
Each group of States referred to in section 3, paragraph 15 (a), (b),
(c) and (d), of this Annex shall be represented on the Committee by
at least one member. Until the Authority has sufficient funds other
than assessed contributions to meet its administrative expenses, the
membership of the Committee shall include representatives of the
five largest financial contributors to the administrative budget of the
Authority. Thereafter, the election of one member from each group
shall be on the basis of nomination by the members of the respective
group, without prejudice to the possibility of further members being
elected from each group.
4. Members of the Finance Committee shall hold office for a term of five
years. They shall be eligible for re-election for a further term.
5. In the event of the death, incapacity or resignation of a member of
the Finance Committee prior to the expiration of the term of office,
the Assembly shall elect for the remainder of the term a member
from the same geographical region or group of States.
6. Members of the Finance Committee shall have no financial interest
in any activity relating to matters upon which the Committee has the
responsibility to make recommendations. They shall not disclose,
even after the termination of their functions, any confidential
information coming to their knowledge by reason of their duties for
the Authority.
7. Decisions by the Assembly and the Council on the following issues
shall take into account recommendations of the Finance Committee:
(a) Draft financial rules, regulations and procedures of the organs
of the Authority and the financial management and internal
financial administration of the Authority;
(b) Assessment of contributions of members to the administrative
156

[Page 157]
budget of the Authority in accordance with article 160,
paragraph 2 (e), of the Convention;
(c) All relevant financial matters, including the proposed annual
budget prepared by the Secretary-General of the Authority in
accordance with article 172 of the Convention and the financial
aspects of the implementation of the programmes of work of
the Secretariat;
(d) The administrative budget;
(e) Financial obligations of States Parties arising from the
implementation of this Agreement and Part XI as well as the
administrative and budgetary implications of proposals and
recommendations involving expenditure from the funds of the
Authority;
(f) Rules, regulations and procedures on the equitable sharing of
financial and other economic benefits derived from activities in
the Area and the decisions to be made thereon.
8. Decisions in the Finance Committee on questions of procedure shall
be taken by a majority of members present and voting. Decisions on
questions of substance shall be taken by consensus.
9. The requirement of article 162, paragraph 2 (y), of the Convention
to establish a subsidiary organ to deal with financial matters shall be
deemed to have been fulfilled by the establishment of the Finance
Committee in accordance with this section.
157

[Page 159]
159