[Page 1]
ISBA/31/C/CRP.4
10 February 2026
English only
Thirty-first session
Council session, part I
Kingston,
9-20 March 2026
Draft regulations on exploitation of Mineral resources in the
Area
Draft indicative list of outstanding issues
Explanatory note
1. Pursuant to the Council's decision at its thirtieth session (ISBA/30/C/18), the elaboration of
Rules, Regulations and Procedures for exploitation of Mineral resources in the Area shall
continue through a thematic approach organised into four principal themes:
(i) environmental matters;
(ii) financial matters;
(iii) regulatory, procedural and institutional matters; and
(iv) governance matters.
2. The Council further requested the Secretariat to prepare a draft indicative list identifying key
outstanding issues to facilitate focused negotiations.
3. The present list has been prepared by the Secretariat for the Council’s review and decision,
dedicated to key outstanding issues:
i) that require more immediate and substantive work to advance the negotiations;
ii) those on which the views of Council members have proven most difficult to reconcile;
iii) those with the most potential for impact at a cross-cutting level;
iv) those where lack of decision might block further progress of parts of the draft
regulations.
v) those whose consideration has been postponed pending discussion of other matters;
vi) those on which agreement within the Council appears close to being reached;
vii) and those where the majority of proposals – submitted by delegations, working groups
and Friends of the President and recalled below in the relevant description of the issue –
consist primarily of suggestions for refinement.
(b) The second section is dedicated to additional cross-cutting issues, which cannot be
considered as falling under a specific thematic area.
c) The third section provides a recommendation of the Secretariat.
4. It is important to stress that this list is indicative in nature and remains subject to the review
and decision of the Council.
1

[Page 2]
I. KEY OUTSTANDING ISSUES
A. Environmental Matters
Issue 1: Conditions for beginning Exploitation of the Area
Relevant regulation: Draft regulations 2(3)
This issue determines the conditions under which the commencement of exploitation activities
can begin and can significantly impact the timeline that will lead to such activities. Such
conditions are currently set out in paragraph 3 of draft regulation 2. There is considerable debate
among delegations on whether the paragraph should be retained, and if yes, what the wording
should be.
Issue 2: Test Mining and Pilot Mining
Relevant regulation: Draft regulation 48ter (and draft regulations 7,11,12,13,46,48, 48bis, Annex
VII and Schedule)
The discussion on Test and Pilot Mining might affect not only the draft Exploitation Regulations,
but also the Exploration Regulations. While it is mainly contained in draft regulation 48ter,
references to it affect several other draft regulations.
A list of issues that need further attention relating to this issue has been prepared by the Co-
Facilitators of the Informal Working Group.
Issue 3: Environmental Compensation Fund
Relevant regulations: Section 4 (draft regulation 54-56)
The discussion of the principles and mechanisms underlying the establishment of the
Environmental Compensation Fund is currently entrusted to a Friends of the President Group,
and is contained in draft regulations 54, 55 and 56.
Certain aspects of the Environmental Compensation Fund have received considerable support –
including, inter alia, its establishment and purpose; Other details relating for instance to the way
in which the Environmental Compensation Fund would be funded, remain to be agreed.
Issue 4: Environmental Goals and Objectives
Relevant regulations: Draft regulation 44 ter
The formulation of Strategic Environmental Goals and Objectives of the Authority is currently
entrusted to a Friends of the President Group. Currently, Goals and Objectives of the Authority
are included in draft regulation 44ter. Considerations are still being given as to whether they
should be moved to a standalone policy recommended by the Council and adopted by the
Assembly. In the Further Revised Consolidated Text, draft regulation 44ter has been retained in
line with the proposal of the Friends of the President.
Issue 5: Legal Status of REMPs
Relevant regulations: Draft regulation 44 bis (and draft regulations 7, 12, 14 and 15)
The legal nature of Regional Environmental Management Plans (REMPs) in the Regulations has
been subject to considerable debate. While most delegations agree that a REMP should be in
place in any area where exploitation activities are being undertaken, delegations expressed
different views as to whether REMPs should be considered legally binding. The issue is currently
entrusted to a Friends of the President Group, which has presented a comprehensive proposal for
consideration by the Council.
2

[Page 3]
Issue 6: Environmental Management and Monitoring
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 49-52
The Informal Working Group on Environmental Management and Monitoring has provided
proposals of draft regulation 49 to 52. The focus of the work in the past has been on the
restructuring of the section. To finalize, the Council may wish to focus on substantive proposals.
Issue 7: Closure Plans
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 59-61 and Annex VIII
Substantial changes have been made to Part VI concerning the Closure Plan. To finalize, the
Council may now wish to focus on the new proposals.
Issue 8: Protection of Submarine Cables
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 31 and 31 bis
In former sessions, efforts of the Council have been directed at ensuring that due regard is paid
to other uses of the Area and to other activities in the marine environment, as prescribed under
Art. 147 of the Convention. Among the most crucial activities that take place in the Area is the
laying of cables and pipelines. The work on this matter is currently carried out in the context of
a Friends of the President’s Group, which has submitted a proposal (available on the website of
the Authority) included in the Further Revised Consolidated Text. To finalize, the Council may
wish to focus on agreeing language for these regulations.
Issue 9: Definition of "Incident" and "Notifiable Event"
Relevant regulations: Schedule
During the first part of the thirtieth session, some delegations highlighted the need for a more
comprehensive definition of both “Incidents” and “Notifiable Events” in the Schedule of the
Further Revised Consolidated Text. To finalize, the Council may wish to address the matter in a
small drafting group to submit appropriate language.
B. Financial Matters
Issue 10: Payment system and Review of Payment Mechanism
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 81-82, Draft Standard and Guidelines and Schedule
The Council must decide on the System of Payments and the review mechanism of said system.
It is recalled that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has provided different payment
system models that must be decided upon. The fourth option (two-stage variable ad valorem
royalty) has been implemented in the draft Standard and Guidelines which currently is available
in the Further Revised Suspense Document. It is recommended that this should be taken into
consideration when finalizing the review mechanism in draft regulation 81. In respect of the
review mechanism, reference is made to the Friends of the President group on draft regulations
81 and 82.
Issue 11: Equalization Measure
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 64bis and draft equalisation standard
The equalization measure is designed to ensure that Contractors face similar rates of payment
compared to land-based miners regardless of any Sponsoring State tax exemptions that they do,
or do not, receive. The work on this issue has been carried out by the IWG, which has proposed
the language contained in the Further Revised Consolidated Text (draft regulation 64bis). During
the second part of the thirtieth session, a phrase has been added to properly reflect the peculiar
situation of the Enterprise. The two substantive options for the equalization measure (the “hybrid
model” and the “Profit Share model”, as explained in the presentation made during the second
3

[Page 4]
part of the thirtieth session) are currently being discussed within the Group, and the preferred
alternative will be included in a specific Standard.
Issue 12: Environmental Externalities in Royalty System Design
Relevant regulations: Draft regulation 64ter
The payment of further royalties to compensate the environmental costs that activities in the Area
might cause is currently provided for in draft regulation 64ter of the Further Revised
Consolidated Text. The proposal follows a study commissioned in 2022 and published in 2023,
available on the website of the Authority. Following the publication of the study, the Council did
not find consensus on the inclusion of a provision on environmental externalities: while some
delegations were in favour, others considered that the proposal does not sufficiently reflect the
“positive externalities”, meaning the positive effects that the activities might produce. To
finalize, the Council may wish to address the matter in a small drafting group to submit
appropriate language for further consideration.
Issue 13: Financial Incentives
Relevant regulations: Draft regulation 63
Incentives are regulated in draft regulation 63 and divergent views are presented in terms of how
financial incentives should be handled. Therefore, the different alternatives should cons be
considered. To finalize, the Council may wish to address the matter in a small drafting group to
submit appropriate language for further consideration.
Issue 14: Transfer Profit Share
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 65 (and draft regulation 23, paragraph 6 bis)
It has been proposed that the Authority shall levy a Transfer Profit Share in respect of transfer of
rights. Previously it was handled as part of draft regulation 23, and now a newly proposed draft
regulation 65 has been inserted. To finalize, the Council may wish to address the matter in a
small drafting group to submit appropriate language for further consideration.
Issue 15: Monopolization
Relevant regulations: 23, 107 and Schedule
Under Art. 6 of Annex III to the Convention, the approval of a Plan of Work must not “permit a
State Party or entities sponsored by it to monopolize the conduct of activities in the Area or to
preclude other States Parties from activities in the Area”. During the thirtieth session, it has been
highlighted by some delegations that the Regulations lack specific provision to prevent
monopolization, as well as an agreed definition in the Schedule. To finalize, the Council may
wish to address the matter in a small drafting group to submit appropriate language for further
consideration.
C. Regulatory, Procedural and Institutional Matters
Issue 16: Effective Control
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 5-7, 13, 21, 24, 24bis, 40, Annex I and Schedule
Art. 139 and 153 of the Convention require the Contractor to be sponsored by the State of
nationality and the State by who or whose nationals the Contractor is “effectively controlled”.
However, what such “effective control” constitutes is left undefined both in the Convention and
the 1994 Agreement. The role of the Sponsoring State has been clarified in the 2011 Advisory
Opinion of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. In particular, the role of the
Sponsoring State is not to provide a financial guarantee, but to ensure “that the obligations set
out in the Convention, a treaty under international law which binds only States Parties thereto,
4

[Page 5]
are complied with by entities that are subjects of domestic legal systems” (paragraph 75 of the
Advisory Opinion).
The discussion of the issue in essence relates to the requirements for the identification of the
State by whom or by whose nationals the applicant is “effectively controlled”. During the second
part of the thirtieth session, two proposals have been presented to reconcile the different views
on this issue. The two proposals on the definition of effective control are currently included in
the proposal of the IWG on Effective Control.
Issue 17: ICE Mechanism and Establishment of the Compliance Committee
Relevant regulations: Part XI and in particular draft regulation 95 bis
As there seems to be agreement on the establishment of the Compliance Committee, the most
recent efforts of the IWG on the ICE Mechanism have focused on the structure of the documents
that will concern it. Reference is made not only to the newly proposed structure for draft
regulation 95 bis (previously 102), but also to the proposed draft decision on the establishment
of the Compliance Committee, as well as the proposed draft Rules of Procedure and draft
Compliance Strategy of the Committee, all available on the website of the Authority.
Some of the core outstanding issues in this respect is the placement of power and functions of
the Compliance Committee and the interplay between the Compliance Committee and the LTC
mandates. The Council may wish to consider deepening the discussions to find agreed language.
Issue 18: Resources Covered by the Regulations
Relevant regulations: Preamble
During the first part of the thirtieth session, several delegations suggested that the Regulations
should specify the categories of resources covered by the Regulations, rather than rely on general
references to “resources” or “mineral resources”. The Convention provides that priority shall be
given to the adoption of rules, regulations and procedures for the exploration and exploitation of
polymetallic nodules. To conclude, the Council may wish to determine on whether the scope of
the mineral domains could be considered in a differentiated manner, taking into account the three
categories of regulated minerals.
Issue 19: Parent Company Liability
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 23, paragraph 5(d), 24, Annex XI and Schedule
The issue of the liability of parent companies for damage cause by their controlled entities
because of activities in the Area should be conceptually distinguished from the one of effective
control. Sponsorship by a State that effectively controls an entity does not involve the provision
of a financial guarantee. On the other hand, proposals to regulate this issue aim at ensuring
financial accountability (in the form of liability) of the parent company that controls an entity
carrying out activities in the Area. Proposals have been put forward by some delegations to
ensure this outcome, notably through the introduction in the Regulations of the Parent Company
Liability Statement, meaning a written undertaking of the parent company to take responsibility
for environmental damages caused by the controlled entity because of activities in the Area. The
Council may wish to consider whether the establishment of a small drafting group might be
helpful to find an agreed solution.
Issue 20: Treatment of the Enterprise and of Joint Ventures
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 19 and Schedule
The treatment of the Enterprise in the Regulations essentially relates to the definition of
“Contractor” in the Schedule of the Further Revised Consolidated Text. Under the Convention
and the 1994 Agreement, the Enterprise is to be treated as a Contractor in most cases, while
however being granted some privileges such as the exemption from payments to the Authority
for the first ten years since its operationalisation. Two alternative wordings have been proposed
by the Interim Director-General of the Enterprise to reflect the position of the Enterprise in the
definition of “Contractor”. A paper has also been presented on the potential treatment of the
5

[Page 6]
Enterprise in the Regulations, accompanied by a table analysing references to the term
“Contractor” in the draft Regulations considering the role of the Enterprise. It is important that
the treatment of the Enterprise is discussed and decided upon as it plays an important role
throughout the Regulations.
Issue 21: Non-compliance Notice, Suspension and Termination of the Contract
Relevant regulations: Draft regulation 103
A Friends of the President’s Group has provided substantial proposals for the handling of Non-
Compliance Notice, Suspension and Termination of Exploitation Contracts. The proposals are
incorporated in draft regulation 103 of the Further Revised Consolidated Text and should be
further considered by the Council. The Council may wish to consider this issue in parallel with
the further work on draft regulation 95 bis on the Compliance Committee.
Issue 22: Chief Inspector, Inspectors and Inspections
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 95 bis, 96-101
During the second part of the thirtieth session, several delegations reserved their positions on
this issue pending the further clarification of the structure and mandate of the Compliance
Committee. The matter encompasses aspects relating to the Authority’s inspection mechanism
for ensuring Contractors’ compliance. Among the points on which the Council still needs to hold
further discussions and reach consensus are, inter alia: (a) the role of the Chief Inspector; (b) the
procedures for the nomination and election of the Authority’s Inspectors, including the
establishment of a Roster of Inspectors; and (c) the requirement of prior notification of
forthcoming inspections.
Issue 23: Modification of a Plan of Work
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 57
Modification of Plans of Work are currently covered by draft regulation 57, on which work is
being carried out by a Friends of the President’s Group. In this regard, reference is made to the
proposal submitted for inclusion in the Further Revised Consolidated Text. Based on the content
of draft regulation 57, there might be need for further coordination with draft regulation 58 on
review of the Plan of Work.
Issue 24: Seabed Mining Register
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 92
The work on draft regulation 92 on the Seabed Mining Register is carried out under a Friends of
the President’s Group. A proposal has been submitted for consideration of the Council to
streamline the draft regulation and ensure consistency with other relevant regulations.
Issue 25: Confidential Information and Procedures to Ensure Confidentiality
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 89-91
The discussion on the extent to which information may be regarded as Confidential Information,
as well as on the procedures to ensure its confidentiality, is addressed in draft regulations 89 to
91. Among the aspects requiring further consideration, attention is drawn to the potential
classification of environmental information, or parts thereof, as Confidential Information, an
issue on which opposing views were expressed during the second part of the thirtieth session. To
finalize, the Council may wish to address the matter in a small drafting group to submit
appropriate language for further consideration.
6

[Page 7]
Issue 26: Whistleblowing Protections
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 101bis
During the second part of the thirtieth session, most delegations agreed on the current content of
draft regulation 101bis on whistleblowing procedures, which has been retained as a placeholder
pending further discussion on the content of a general whistleblowing policy of the Authority.
The structure and content of such policy is yet to be discussed by the Council.
Issue 27: Prevention of Corruption
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 40
Mechanisms for the prevention of corruption are currently provided for in draft regulation 40,
covered by a Friends of the President’s Group. A proposal has been submitted for inclusion on
the Revised Consolidated Text, available on the website of the Authority. Some of the points that
the Council might want to address relating to this issue are included in the report of the Friends
of the President’s Group on draft regulation 40.
Issue 28: Review of the Regulations
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 107
Draft regulation 107 deals with the review of the Regulations. During the second part of the
thirtieth session, opposing views were expressed on the overall content of this draft regulation.
Moreover, it is suggested that the provision might benefit from further alignment for instance
with the periodic review of the inspection, compliance and enforcement mechanism (draft
regulation 105bis).
D. Governance Matters
Issue 29: Rights and Interests of Coastal States
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 4, 4bis and 93bis
The issue of rights and interests of coastal States, as well as of the mechanisms – such as
consultation – to be put in place avoid infringement of such rights and interests is currently
managed by a Working Group. The latest proposal of the Group – available on the website of the
Authority – includes a comprehensive revision of draft regulations 4 and 93bis (previously
93ter), as well as a newly proposed draft regulation 4bis. The work in respect of rights and
interests of Coastal States seems to be quite advanced and need further intention in order to land
on a basis that can be implemented throughout the Regulations.
Issue 30: Underwater Cultural Heritage
Relevant regulations: Draft regulations 35 and 35 Alt
The inclusion of the Regulations on Underwater Cultural Heritage (UCH) – covered by a specific
IWG on this matter – has been discussed in detail, but opposing views remain among delegations
on specific points. Disagreement concerns in particular the forms of UCH that should be
referenced in the Regulations (only tangible, or also intangible ones), as well as the modalities
for its protection. Reservations have also been expressed to other elements of the proposal
submitted by the IWG, such as the reference to “cultural rights and interests” and the
establishment of an Advisory Group of Experts on Cultural Matters.
7

[Page 8]
II. ADDITIONAL CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
Cross-Cutting Issue 31: Annexes and the Schedule
The consideration of the Annexes and the Schedule remain incomplete. The Annexes continue
to contain alternatives, as well as deleted and bracketed text, which in some cases has been
proposed for incorporation in the Standards and Guidelines. Definitions contained in the
Schedule have not yet been examined by the Council, except insofar as they fall within the scope
of a working group or Friends of the President group.
Cross-Cutting Issue 32: Standards and Guidelines
During the second part of the thirtieth session, a revised draft list of Standards and Guidelines
was presented for consideration of the Council. The Council agreed to defer further consideration
of this matter to its next session, under the agenda item relating to the draft regulations on
exploitation.
In light of the progress to the Further Revised Consolidated Text, the list of anticipated Standards
and Guidelines requires updating. It is proposed that the envisaged Standards and Guidelines be
consolidated into a smaller number of instruments. It is further proposed that the Council agree
upon a consolidated list and request the LTC to update the existing Phase I Standards and
Guidelines, while commencing the development of the remaining Standards and Guidelines.
III. RECOMMENDATIONS
In light of the above, the Council may wish to consider:
1. Prioritising this list of key outstanding and cross-cutting issues and work towards their
resolution.
2. Directing intersessional working groups and Friends of the President’s groups to develop
textual proposals addressing specific issues within assigned thematic areas;
3. Ensuring that cross-cutting issues are addressed across working groups and Friends of the
President groups;
4. Ensuring that solutions to individual issues are considered in the context of the overall
regulatory package.
8