[Page 1]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Deep Sea Mineral
Exploitation in the Area
Draft framework, High level issues and Action plan, Version II 15 July 2015
(Reviewed and revised for Stakeholder responses to the Report to Members of the
Authority and all stakeholders issued 23 March 2015).
Content
1. Draft framework for the Exploitation Regulations…………………………..2
2. Summary of high level issues……………………………….......................43
3. Draft action plan / Priority deliverables……………………………………..50
1

[Page 2]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
1. Draft / working framework for the Exploitation Regulations
2

[Page 3]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Glossary of abbreviations
APEIs Areas of particular environmental interest
BEP Best environmental practice
DSM Deep seabed mining
EIA Environmental impact assessment
EIS Environmental impact statement
EITI Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
EMP Environmental management plan
EMS Environmental management system
IRZ Impact reference zone(s)
PRZ Preservation reference zone(s)
RRPs Rules, regulations and procedures (of the
Authority)
SEIA Strategic environmental impact assessment
SEMP Strategic environmental management plan
3

[Page 4]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Working structure for Exploitation o Closure plan
Regulations o Size and location of exploitation area covered
by the plan of work
Title • Fees
o Fee for applications
Preamble
• Processing of applications
• Objectives & overarching principles / purpose o Receipt, acknowledgement and safe custody of
applications
Part I – Introduction o Public review of the Environmental impact
statement and Environmental management
• Use of terms and scope
plan [and Social impact assessment and
Closure plan]
Part II – Applications for approval of plans of work for
exploitation in the form of contracts o Consideration by the Legal and Technical
Commission
• General provisions o Consideration and approval of plans of work for
• Content of applications exploitation by the Council
o Form of applications o Independent technical expert working group(s) /
o Certificate of sponsorship sub-committees
o Financial & technical capabilities
o Previous contracts with the Authority Part III – Contracts for exploitation
o Undertakings
o The contract
o Applications for approval of plans of work with
o Rights of the contractor
respect to a reserved area
o Obligations of the Authority
o Equity interest in a joint venture arrangement
o Legal title to minerals
o Data and information to be submitted for
o Duration of contracts / renewal
approval of the plan of work for exploitation
o Performance requirements
o Feasibility study
o Avoidance of unnecessary waste in respect of the
o Environmental impact statement
resources of the Area
o Environmental management plan
o Use of sub-contractors
o Social impact assessment and action plan
o Vessels operating in the Area
o Financing plan
o Protection of submarine cables and pipelines
4

[Page 5]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
o Health and safety o Duty to co-operate
o Training
o Periodic review of the implementation of the plan of Part VII – Enforcement, offences and penalties
work for exploitation
1. Inspection
o Termination of sponsorship
2. Offences & penalties
o Responsibility and liability
Part VIII – Settlement of disputes
Part IV – Protection and preservation of the marine
o Disputes
environment
o Protection and preservation of the marine environment Part IX – Other mineral resource categories
o Environmental management
Part X – Review
o Emergency orders
o Strategic environmental management plan
Annexes to exploitation regulations
o Rights of coastal States
o Environmental bonds and performance guarantees Annex I – Application for approval of a plan of work for
o Restoration and rehabilitation of the marine exploitation to obtain a contract
environment
Annex II – Standard clauses for exploitation contract plus
o Adaptive management approach
schedules
o Seabed sustainability fund
o Environmental liability trust fund
o Human remains and objects and sites of an
archaeological or historical nature
Part V – Confidentiality
o Confidentiality of data and information
o Procedures to ensure confidentiality
Part VI – General Procedures
o Notice and general procedures
o Recommendations for the guidance of contractors
5

[Page 6]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft Specific Commentary / suggested content Actions for operationalization
regulation elements of draft regulation
description1
Preamble Objectives & The Exploration Regulations contain a short preamble. It will To be drafted.
overarching be helpful, if not crucial to include further wording to setout the
principles / clear objectives and intention for the exploitation regulations,
purpose. which should include the policy objectives of the Convention
and the 1994 Agreement.
The preamble is simply to put the framework into context and
its overall aims and goals.
Part I Introduction
Use of Terms Definitions The Exploration Regulations2 contain relatively few terms and This section will evolve as the
and scope applicable to the definitions. It is likely that the Exploitation Regulations will regulatory framework evolves.
exploitation include more comprehensive definitions to aid interpretation. Definitions should reflect
regime. These will include those already presented in the Exploration internationally agreed and accepted
Regulations, save as amended to reflect current practice. definitions where possible.
This section is considered a high priority by a number of Work should commence on this
stakeholders. section as soon as possible albeit
some terms and definitions may need
to be defined at later date as the
framework evolves.
1 Description corresponds to that contained in the Exploration Regulations, save for any new, proposed regulatory provision.
2 Refers to the Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area (PN Exploration Regulations), ISBA/19/C/17, 22 July 2013.
6

[Page 7]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Part II Applications for approval of plans of work for exploitation in the form of contracts
• Not applicable.
General Defines the • Use wording identical to that contained in the
entities that may Exploration Regulations.
apply for a plan
of work for
exploitation.
• Guidelines for the Preparation of
Form of Defines § Wording in Exploration Regulations remains relevant,
a Plan of Work for Exploitation
applications requirement for however:-
need drafting, including a
a plan of work in § Should a “plan of work for exploitation” cover multiple
standard application form.
a form to be exploitation areas, within say the area covered under an
• Future development / licensing of
prescribed in existing contract for exploration?
an online application
Annex I. § Each distinct area of exploitation may have different
management system.
physical characteristics and environmental conditions.
• Thought to be given to “new
§ Options available to the Authority: (1) to request separate
ways of doing business” as
plans of work for exploitation where there are “material”
highlighted by the Commission in
differences between “exploitation areas” and / or (2) to
the context of exploration and its
request separate documents (Feasibility study,
impact(s) on exploitation
Environmental impact statement (EIS) and Environmental
applications.3
management plan (EMP)) for each exploitation area (as
ultimately defined).
§ A number of diverging views have been expressed by
stakeholders here. Comments made include: that
determining “material differences” may be subjective
(unless clear and objective criteria can be set); that
separate plans of work may involve an unncessary cost
burden and that there should be a separate plan of work
unless it can be demonstrated two individual areas are
“sufficiently similar” in terms of scale of
3 See Summary Report of the Chair of the Legal and Technical Commission on the work of the Commission during the twentieth session of the International
Seabed Authority, ISBA/20/C/20, 16 July 2014 at para 31.
7

[Page 8]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
operations,environmental baseline conditions etc. This
framework element requires further consideration and a
need to anticipate “new ways of doing business”.
• Not applicable.
Certificate of Defines the • Use wording identical to that contained in the
sponsorship requirement for Exploration Regulations.
a certificate of
sponsorship.
• Further best practice to be
Financial and A key provision • Much of the wording reflected in the Exploration
developed from national regimes
technical for the delivery Regulation can be retained.
and suggestions in the
capabilities of due diligence • However, a greater level of detail will be required to
Stakeholder Survey.
information evaluate “financial capability” and “technical capability” in
• Guidelines for the Preparation
about an connection with the delivery of a plan of work for
and Evaluation of Information
applicant. exploitation, including the capability to deliver approved
relating to Financial capability
development and production requirements and the delivery
and Technical capability to be
of EMP obligations.
drafted.
• Evaluation criteria needed for the Commissions’
assessment procedures.
• To consider how this regulation is to be applied uniformly
across all contractor entities particularly financial capability
in relation to States and the extent to which this should be
assessed to ensure uniform application / transparent &
uniform enforcement.4
• Health and safety to be included in technical capabilities.
• The term “preference and
Previous Content of • Details of existing contract(s) for exploration is important in
priority” must be clarified.
contracts with Exploration establishing a “preference and a priority” in an applicant’s
the Authority Regulation can plan of work for exploitation.5
be retained. • Any assessment process to consider that deliverables and
4 Note: Annex III, Article 4(5) that “[t]he procedures for assessing the qualifications of States Parties which are applicants shall take into account their character as
States.
5 Regulation 24(2) PN Exploration Regulations states: “A contractor who has an approved plan of work for exploration only shall have a preference and a priority
among applicants submitting plans of work for exploitation of the same area and resources”.
8

[Page 9]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
obligations under a contract(s) for exploration have been
observed.
• Concern has been expressed by some stakeholders over
the exact nature of a “preference and priority” under the
Exploration Regulations and the transferring of this
“exploitation priority” to an exclusive exploitation right and
the procedures associated with this.
• Council could consider
Undertakings Specific • Use wording identical to that contained in the Exploration
incorporating additional
undertakings Regulation. However, this maybe an opportunity to modify
undertakings particularly in
contained in or clarify undertakings fundamental to delivery of plan of
connection with uneconomic
Annex III, Article work / contractual obligations?
practices. LTC to make
4(6) of the • Could be used to include specific and fundamental
recommendations on suitable
Convention.6 contract terms, for example in respect of unfair economic
wording.
practices anticipated by Annex, Section 6(1)(b) of the
• A technical working paper
Agreement7, including disclosure of anti-competitive
requires preparation by an expert
practices and the obligation to pay fees and royalties etc.
familiar with the international
General consensus by stakeholders that amended wording
trade issues raised by Annex,
would be appropriate.
Section 6(1)(b) of the Agreement
and specific RRPs drafted as
required by Section 6(6).8 To
consider how other regimes have
handled this area.
6 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
7 Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982.
8 Under Section 6(6) of the Agreement, the Authority is obliged to “develop, rules, regulations and procedures which ensure the implementation of the provisions of
this section, including relevant rules, regulations and procedures governing the overall approval of plans of work”.
9

[Page 10]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
• Not applicable (at this stage).
Applications Wording in the • To consider wording in the light of the timing and
for approval of Exploration operationalization of the Enterprise.
plans of work Regulations
with respect to appears to
a reserved suffice.
area
• Action plan for operationalization
Equity interest Wording in the • Again, to consider wording in the light of the timing and
of the Enterprise to be
in a joint Exploration operationalization of the Enterprise.
developed.
venture Regulations
arrangement appears to
suffice.
• See Guidelines for the
Data and This draft • Documents that would typically9 be supplied in support of a
Preparation of a Plan of Work for
information to regulation plan of work for exploitation could include:
Exploitation above.
be submitted should outline i. Feasibility study (or report);
• See also individual document
for approval of the documents, ii. Environmental impact statement (EIS);
draft regulations following.
the plan of information and iii. Environmental management plan (EMP);
work for other data iv. Social impact assessment / statement and action
exploitation required for an plan (this may be integrated into the EIS above);
application. v. Financing plan;
vi. Closure plan;
vii. Training plan / programme;
viii. [Emergency response and procedures plan:
although not normally a separate document as it
would be reflected elsewhere, given the concept of
“emergency orders” this could be provided as a
separate document];
ix. [Health, safety and maritime security plan: again
this can be integrated into the EIS].
9 “Typically” refers to those documents usually supplied under a land-based mining regime. See for example, Model Mine Development Agreement, International
Bar Association (2011).
10

[Page 11]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
• See also “Form of applications” above concerning
separate documents or separate plans of work.
• Guidelines for the Preparation
Feasibility Content and • Content to be adequate to assess commercial viability of
and Evaluation (criteria) of a
study structure to be proposed exploitation activities by exploitation area. But
Feasibility study to be drafted.
defined for what is role of Authority in assessing “commercial
• Have any “blueprint” feasibility
exploitation viability”? How would “commercial viability” be defined?
studies been developed for DSM
activities. • To be prepared in accordance with good mining industry
activities that can be adopted by
practice and based on sound engineering and economic
the Authority?11 (To ensure
principles and accompanied by a report of a suitably
consistency and comparability in
qualified person(s),10 including mining engineer
applications).
(qualifications, criteria and mechanism for choice to be
• Perhaps recognize that a
defined / clarified).
“bankable” feasibility study may
• As part of the application process, alternative development
not be available until the industry
or production plans may be requested to ensure the
is proven at a commercial scale.
optimization (including timing) of proceeds of commercial
production. Comment has been made that any “right” for
the ISA to request alternative development or production
plans should be removed; this is considered a purely
commercial judgment and that the ISA is not qualified to
substitute its judgment. Perhaps this point can be
discussed as part of the overall role of the Authority as a
regulator. It may be appropriate that the Authority retain
the right to request alternative plans and perhaps explain
in a regulatory policy or guidance document the
circumstances where this request may be made and the
rationale for any such request.
• Should also reflect environmental considerations: e.g. the
impact of required research, mitigation and monitoring etc
10 This will be defined under “Use of terms and scope” and should include reference to an internationally recognized mining consulting firm. The
LTC consider that a third party report and verification by a suitably qualified person, being a person(s) independent of an applicant contractor, is a
mechanism that will assist the LTC with its initial application assessment workloads.
11 Blue Mining is developing blueprints for feasibility studies. Also see outline content in ISA Technical Study No. 11.
11

[Page 12]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
on overall economic feasibility. That is, a feasibility study
should address the overall sustainability of a project.
• Draft EIS template in Technical
Environmental Content of EIS • An EIS should be, inter alia
Study No.10 to be reviewed and
impact to be further i. Based on the Environmental impact assessment
updated. The SPC-EU Deep Sea
statement defined / (EIA), on “sound engineering and economic
Minerals Project has offered to
(EIS) finalised and be principles” and good mining industry practice, the
share a revised version of the TS
resource- precautionary approach, best environmental
No. 10 template.
category practices and verified by an internationally
specific.12 recognized environmental consulting firm • Guidelines for the Preparation
and Evaluation of an
(selection criteria and mechanism to be defined).
Environmental Impact Statement
ii. Prepared in a language (define) to facilitate review
to be drafted.16 Should include
by interested parties plus a non-technical (define)
simple rating criteria (e.g. US
summary.
EPA rating criteria). Needs to be
iii. Establish baseline of environmental conditions13 (a
resource-category specific.
key deliverable under the Exploration
• It is recommended that the
Regulations).
above be undertaken by an
iv. An assessment of project-related significant effects
expert and a draft template and
and impacts, including cumulative impacts.
guidelines circulated for
• A draft EIS template can be found in ISA Technical Study
comment by interested parties.
No: 1014 but requires further development and finalisation.
• Stakeholders observe that no
• EIA guidelines to establish clear expectations for baseline
reference has been made to the
data.
EIA process itself. Process,
• The EIA / EIS should endorse an inter multi-disciplinary
principles, consultation
approach.
processes and definitions of
• The Stakeholder Survey highlighted a number of standards
acceptable impact to be defined.
and resources for EIA / EIS preparation to be taken
Acceptable impact? Challenge of
account of in developing a model EIS.15
12 As knowledge is improved, a more structured process of screening and scoping an EIS can evolve.
13 Broaden baseline definition to “environmental conditions and values” i.e. biodiversity values (EBSAs, important bird areas).
14 Environmental Management Needs for Exploration and Exploitation of Deep Sea Minerals, ISA Technical Study No. 10 (2012) at 17.
12

[Page 13]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
• The concept of an “Environmental Impact Area” may need conservation interests,
to be developed to cover areas beyond the exploitation sustainable development
area(s), horizontally and vertically (and cumulative interests and commercial
impacts) where significant impacts may occur. Cumulative interests; the interaction between
impacts / effects to be clearly defined. Also identify area the various stakeholders needs
associated with each impact type rather than a single area. to be defined. Guidelines for
Boundary points The spatial and temporal extent of Environmental impact
Environmental impact areas needs clearly defining and to assessment process / Best
be informed by best science. Where multiple exploitation Practice Manual to be drafted.
areas within a contract area, how will an environmental May require a working group.
impact area be defined / enclosed? Strategic
environmental assessments should also address and
inform cumulative impacts in this regard.
• As standards change through knowledge acquisition, what
will be the resubmission obligations, if any, placed on
contractors?
• An EMP should include inter alia: • EMP template needs to be
Environmental Structure and
i. Based on the EIS and on “sound engineering and drafted.
management content of EMP
economic principles” and good mining industry • Guidelines for the Preparation
plan (EMP) to be drafted /
practice (including IFC Performance Standards 1 and Evaluation of an
defined.
and 617 and other relevant internationally Environmental management plan
recognized standards18) and the precautionary to be drafted.
approach, best environmental practices and • Similar to EIS, it is recommended
verified by an internationally recognized that the above be undertaken by
environmental consulting firm. an expert and a draft template
ii. Prepared in a language to facilitate review by and guidelines circulated for
interested parties. comment by interested parties.
15 For example, Commission for Environmental Assessment Biodiversity in EIA & SEA Background Document to CBD Decision VIII/28: Voluntary Guidelines on
Biodiversity-Inclusive Assessment April 2006; UNEP Environmental Impact Assessment and Strategic Environmental Assessment: Towards an Integrated
Approach 2004; EIS Solwara 1 Project Nautilus Minerals Niugini Ltd.
16 Simple set of criteria for rating EISs could be helpful. See for example, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Impact Assessment Rating System
Criteria.
17 Endorsed in the Stakeholder Survey.
18 Modified for DSM-specific impacts, as the case may be.
13

[Page 14]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
iii. Methodologies to be employed, sampling and • Guidelines for the design and
archiving, location of monitoring stations, monitoring of Preservation
measurable criteria and threshold indicators. Reference Zones and Impact
iv. Should reflect parameters for and functionality of Reference Zones to be
Preservation reference zones (PRZs) and Impact developed. This may require an
reference zones (IRZs). expert working group.
v. Measures / plans for monitoring, management, • Possible multi-stakeholder
conservation, remediation, [restoration / workshops post development of
rehabilitation]19 and control including those to EIA process, EIS and EMP
avoid, minimise, mitigate, rehabilitate and offset, templates.
where appropriate, impacts on biological diversity
within the impacted area and plans to prevent,
minimise, mitigate impacts to water column.
• “Offsets” requires detailed consideration. Not to be seen as
an alternative to monitoring, mitigation and management.
• EMP to be supported by an approved environmental
management system (see “Environmental management”
below).
• Subject to inspection regime and frequent (say, every 2
years?) independent audit.
• Preparation (and delivery) to reflect best environmental
practice (BEP) and application of the precautionary
approach.
• Any conditions attaching to EMP approval to be outcomes
based, measurable, clear, reasonable and enforceable.
Flexibility of EMP to changes and other conditions on an
agreed case-by-case basis.
• Timing of delivery of EMP: with EIS or conditional and prior
to commercial exploitation / post EIS e.g. 3-6months prior
to commercial exploitation?
• See also Strategic environmental management plan under
19 See “Restoration and rehabilitation of the marine environment” below.
14

[Page 15]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Part IV below: a need for co-operation and harmonisation
with contractor EMP process.
• Discussion to be advanced on a
Social impact Content / action • Can be integrated with EIS.20 General consensus SIA can
social action plan for the Area
assessment plan to be be integrated with EIS.
and a call to stakeholders to
and action defined for • Given the remoteness of exploitation activities, no
make contributions to this
plan (SIA) exploitation immediate communities or individuals potentially
discussion.
activities and significantly affected by operations. Caution to be
socio-economic exercised in assuming there are no immediately affected
impacts in the communities. SIA to reflect cultural considerations.
Area. • Other users of the marine environment to be identified
(including scientific research potential and other planned
uses). To reflect interests of current and future
generations?
• Considerations for a social action plan could include
contributions to marine research (e.g. the funding of
research within Areas of Particular Environmental Interest
(APEIs)) and incremental training programmes.
• See also Seabed Sustainability Fund under Part IV below.
• Should SIA extend to an impact on State sponsors? That
is, activities in the Area will have an impact further down
the value chain.
• Template Financing plan
Financing plan Structure and • The financing plan will set out the details of how a
(content requirements) to be
content of plan contractor will finance the capital expenditure, working
drafted.
to be developed. capital needs of the development and production phases
and environmental management obligations.
• Regulations and / or contract to provide for a consent
mechanism to any charge, mortgage or pledge where such
security is required by a financial institution over the
mineral resources / interest in a contract for exploitation.
20 Draft EIS in ISA Technical Study No. 10 reflects “Socio-economic impacts” supra note 8 at page 25.
15

[Page 16]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
• Template Closure plan and
Closure plan Structure and • A closure plan raises many issues. It is seen as a dynamic
Guidelines for the Preparation
content of plan plan that requires regular review and updating and must
and Implementation of a Closure
to be developed. anticipate potential closure of an exploitation area prior to
plan to be drafted.
the expiration of any plan of work.
• It may, however be too early to
• At this point it is difficult to assess the exact contents of a
define the operational
Closure plan for the Area, but may include:-
parameters of the closure plan.
o “basic” decommissioning (removal of installations,
plant and machinery);
o Restorative obligations at the time of closure?
(fuller discussion is needed here. See Restoration
and rehabilitation of the marine environment
below);
o Ecological assessment (determine what is
necessary to allow nature to recover);
o Need for a guarantee or bond? (See
Environmental bonds and guarantees).
o Post closure environmental management and
monitoring obligations to be defined. Also to
determine the period / duration of post closure
monitoring – appropriate benchmark (years)?
• There are matters of policy to be
Size and Guidance • The Convention requires that RRPs be established in
addressed by the Council and
location of criteria for accordance with objective criteria for the size of areas
relevant stakeholders. Specific
exploitation determining the being: stated production requirements, the state of the art
guidelines then need to be drawn
area(s) size (and of technology and relevant physical characteristics of the
up to identify the criteria to be
covered by the location) of areas…which “shall be neither smaller nor larger than are
applied in assessing the size and
plan of work exploitation necessary to satisfy this objective”.21
location of exploitation area(s). It
area(s). • Some stakeholders noted that such RRPs should not
is likely that additional expert
simply be a determinant of size but also of location and
input is required here and / or
21 Annex III, Article 17(2)(a) of the Convention.
16

[Page 17]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
that the Authority reserve the right to determine mining initial thoughts of contractors as
block order22 (adaptive management?23). to their proposed exploitation
• Albeit, stakeholder comments regarding block order were areas and production
directed at environmental considerations, the point is requirements.
equally valid from the viewpoint of practices such as “high-
grading”. What will the Authority’s policy, if any, be here?
An average balanced grade? How will / should this be
defined?24 High grading may reduce environmental
footprint?
• The US Deep Seabed Hard Minerals Resources Act
makes reference to both size and location and to a “logical
mining unit” which includes economic and environmental
considerations as criteria.25
• Principles (“criteria”) for determining the size and location
of the exploitation area suggested in the framework could
include (and reflecting stakeholder responses): -
o The production requirements of the applicant
(Convention) / the commercial viability of the
exploitation area;
o The state of the art technology to be employed
(Convention);
o The relevant physical characteristics of the area
(Convention);
o The environmental considerations including the
location of the exploitation area(s) and the intensity
of the exploitation operations;
o The proximity of the exploitation area(s) to
22 This may necessitate the sub-division of exploitation areas into blocks. To be balanced with applicant’s desire for commercial flexibility to manage exploitation
operations.
23 Initial duration of exploitation operations, review periods and the intensity of exploitation operations are also relevant considerations under an adaptive
management approach.
24 See also Section 4 to this Report: Summary of high level issues.
25 30 U.S. Code § 1413, License and permit applications, review, and certification.
17

[Page 18]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
adjacent exploration and / or exploitation areas
covered under other third party plans of work /
reserved areas;26
o The proximity of exploitation area(s) to marine
protected areas (including APEIs) and vulnerable
marine ecosystems;
o The size and location of PRZs and IRZs
(depending on design criteria – see
“Environmental management plan” above);
o The proximity of exploitation area(s) to coastal
States;
o The impact on other users of the proposed
exploitation area(s);
o The proximity to submarine pipelines and cables.
• It should be noted that there is neither consensus nor
agreement on the above principles and criteria beyond
those stated in the Convention. Further consideration of
this issue is required.
• It will not be possible to set an
Fee for Wording can be • The actual costs of processing exploitation applications will
application fee at this stage until
applications adapted from be considerably higher than that under exploration
the review, assessment and
the exploration applications given the more stringent documentation
administration processes are
regulations. reviews and inspections. Equally, decisions will need to be
fully defined.
made concerning the costs for independent evaluation
processes (e.g. the EA / EMP) and who these are to be
incurred by.
• Additional administration, revision, renewal and consent-
type fees will likely arise under a contract for exploitation.
• Note: the 1994 Agreement requires the payment of an
annual fee from the date of commercial production.27 This
26 There is a real possibility that exploitation operations in one area may impact adjacent exploration or exploitation areas through smothering by operational and
discharge plumes. This needs to be addressed and buffer zones considered.
18

[Page 19]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
will be reflected in the “Financial terms” Part of the
regulations, when drafted.
• Not applicable.
Receipt, Wording can be • No comment.
acknowledgeme adapted from
nt and safe the exploration
custody of
regulations.
applications
• A working paper needs to be
Public review An open, • Under the principle of transparency in decision-making on
drafted setting out the public
of the inclusive and matters likely to have a significant impact on the
participation options and
Environmental cost-effective environment (including socio-economic impacts), an-
procedures available, including
impact decision-making inclusive, open review process needs to be developed,
independent expert review(s),
statement and process needs particularly for the EIS / EMP, SIA and Closure plans.
based on stakeholder
Environmental to be developed • Public concerned / potentially impacted are not
submissions and best practice
management for the review of immediately identifiable but mankind as a whole has,
regimes. The paper must then be
plan [and specific arguably, a vested interest.
circulated to stakeholders for
Social impact documents by • While a public review and engagement process is common
comment.
assessment interested practice in many national jurisdictions, this requires much
• General consensus but further
and Closure parties. thought for activities in the Area, including the practicalities
work needed to inter alia identify
plan] of any procedure, timings and costs.
key stakeholders, review
• A number of alternatives have been put forward by
processes and the management
stakeholders, including review mechanisms by
of stakeholder expectations and
independent experts and panels and the public availability
be supported by an open access
of relevant documents and information for review.
data system.
• All stakeholders endorse an inclusive and transparent
review process. However, clear process and procedures
need to be adopted for this. As noted in one stakeholder
submission “it is important that the degree of influence
public engagement can have on impact assessments and
27 Annex, Section 8(1)(d). The point of commencement of commercial production is broadly defined in Annex III, Article 17(2)(g) of the Convention. There will be a
number of factors that point toward commercial production having been reached. In land-based mining this can be a blurred area and the extent to which it is
possible to define an operating capacity threshold may be preferable.
19

[Page 20]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
management plans required by the RRPs is made very
clear, so that the expectation of those who choose to
engage are appropriate”. A paper concerning this
incorporating other views expressed by stakeholders must
be drafted. From an operator perspective, timelines will
also be key.
• Detailed guidelines will be
Consideration The content of • A re-write of this regulation is likely required to provide for
needed in respect of evaluation
by the Legal this regulation all the necessary eventualities for the Commission’s
criteria to be used by the
and Technical (which can be consideration of a plan of work and its subsequent
Commission.
Commission adapted from recommendation(s) to Council for approval or rejection of
• A technical working paper needs
the Exploration an applicant’s plan of work for exploitation.
to be drafted to elaborate on the
Regulations) • Time limits and milestones in the process will also be
concept of sound commercial
together with critical to contractors as well as the evaluation criteria on
principles (see 1994 Agreement,
evaluation which the Commission will ultimately base their
Annex, Section 6(1)(a)).30
guidelines is key recommendations to Council. This could include any
for contractors – reasonable conditions28 proposed by the Commission (or • A technical working paper is
required to elaborate on
element of negotiated with a contractor) to the Council as part of that
substantial evidence of risk of
certainty as to recommendation procedure.
serious harm to the marine
process, timings • An application for the approval of a plan of work for
environment in the case of
and evaluation exploitation will require approval of all “documents”29
area(s) disapproved for
criteria.
submitted and must ensure that the necessary review and
exploitation.31 This is considered
public participation procedures have been followed and
critical together with a wider
account taken of submissions received by the Commission
discussion of thresholds to take
28 An indication of “reasonable conditions” and how this will be interpreted must be considered and expanded upon. Plans of work will not be identical. Conditions
could include: the provision of a bond or guarantee; the purchase and maintaining of a specified category of insurance; any specific monitoring and reporting
obligations (over and above those under the regulations); the appointment of observers; the duration of consent for an environmental management plan and any
conditions relating in whole or part to an adaptive management approach. Conditions will be recorded in a relevant schedule to a contract for exploitation.
29 Based on the documents (and other information requested) the Commission will need to be satisfied that an applicant has the capability and systems to deliver
health and safety and environmental requirements; that the applicant has adequate technical and financial capability to deliver the plan of work and that project
economics are sound etc.
30 This provision stipulates that as part of the production policy of the Authority, the “development of the resources of the Area shall take place in accordance with
sound commercial principles”. A marine minerals policy and programme document will need drafting as data and information on Area resources is more
comprehensive.
31 See Regulation 21(6)(c) PN Exploration Regulations. The working paper should address the application of the precautionary approach.
20

[Page 21]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
from interested parties. account of the precautionary
approach. / principle. Burden of
proof to be reflected.
• Should any specific Council
Consideration Wording can be • To consider whether Council should take an additional
procedures and criteria be
and approval adapted from governance step of satisfying itself, particularly where a
developed here?
of plans of the Exploration public review process is required, that submissions from
• Stakeholders generally endorse
work for Regulations. any review mechanism have been duly taken account of in
the need for additional
exploitation by the decision-making process and that the application
governance steps by the Council.
the Council conforms, to best of knowledge and belief at the time, that
say Annex, Section 6 of the Agreement has been complied
with.
• Should this be formalised under
Independent Consider setting • Given the pressures that applications for plans of work for
the regulatory framework? Yes,
technical up expert exploitation will place on the existing assessment and
generally endorsed by
expert working working groups decision-making structure, particularly in the LTC,
stakeholders.
group / sub- or sub- additional expert working groups or sub-committees may
committees committees to be required. Specific expert needs will need to be
support the work identified. Clearly defined terms of reference / mandates /
of the rules of procedure for any expert working groups or sub-
Commission. committees will need to be examined and other
international models considered. Such working groups or
sub-committee should be set-up in accordance with the
Convention and / or Agreement.
Part III Contracts for exploitation
• Not applicable. However, the
The Contract Wording can be • In addition to the standard clauses, specific conditions may
Authority must provide an
adapted from be approved by the Council based on recommendations by
indication of “likely” specific
the Exploration the Commission and reflected in the relevant Schedule to
conditions which may be
Regulations. the Contract.
imposed or agreed.
• Priority consideration to be given
Rights of the Wording can be • It would seem appropriate to identify, as exhaustively as
to this by the Secretariat,
adapted from possible, what rights, including exclusive rights, are being
21

[Page 22]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
contractor the Exploration granted here, unless it is felt clear that the definition of proposed language drafted and
Regulations. “exploitation” covers this? For example, the definition of circulated to stakeholders and /
“exploitation” does not include “exploration” but should be or included in zero draft
a right to explore in the exploitation area(s). regulations and standard terms
• This must be prioritized and the nature of exploitation of contract.
rights made clear and unambiguous. See also “Previous
contracts with the Authority” and the issue of “preference
and priority”.
• It is anticipated that the Standard clauses for an
exploitation contract (to be drafted) will provide a clearer
understanding of rights (and obligations) of a contractor.
• Consideration to be given to this
Obligations of To provide • To the extent that any duties of or obligations on the
by the Secretariat. ISA to provide
the Authority clarity on any Authority are unclear or not dealt with elsewhere, a
examples of specific gaps / areas
obligations of provision should be drafted to provide clarity, and reflected
needing clarity; not to exceed /
the Authority. in the standard contract as appropriate.
go beyond Convention /
Agreement.
• Consideration of the phrase
Legal title to To provide that • Are there any restrictions that can / should be placed on
“recovery in accordance with the
minerals legal title passes the transfer of title where the contractor is say in breach?
Convention”32 requires a
on “recovery” For example, a prohibition on sale / disposal until all fees,
technical working paper to be
but with any royalties, profit-share etc. have been paid – or suitable
drafted.
restrictions? arrangements made. Any restrictions to title may impact
• General agreement working
funding terms for commercial operators.
paper needed.
• Clarity on the point at which the legal title transfers is
needed. Diverging points of view.
• Further understanding of
Duration of This draft • The Convention prescribes limited objective criteria:33
contractor development,
contracts / regulation o The economic life of the mining project – depletion
production and economic models
renewal relates to of ore, the useful life of mining equipment and
and plans is required here. To be
security of processing facilities and commercial viability;
32 Annex III, Article 1 of the Convention.
33 Annex III Article 17(b)(iii) of the Convention.
22

[Page 23]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
tenure and a o To permit commercial extraction; and formulated as a matter of priority
key contractual o Reasonable time for construction of commercial- in conjunction with contractors.
term for scale mining and processing systems. • A balance needs to be
contractors. o But (important wording): “the total duration of established between the
exploitation, however, should also be short enough commercial requirements of
to give the Authority an opportunity to amend the contractors and the ability of the
terms and conditions of the plan of work at the Authority to amend terms and
time it considers renewal in accordance with conditions in accordance with
[RRPs] which it has adopted subsequent to revised RRPs.
approving the plan of work”. • A working paper needs to be
• Duration will likely be resource category specific. developed for circulation to
• The Stakeholder Survey identified periods of tenure stakeholders.
ranging from an initial 10-year period to a general • Guidelines need to be developed
consensus range of 15-25 years and renewal (extension) for the following:
periods of 5-10 years (at least in the case of polymetallic o Criteria for contract
nodules). duration – resource
• Duration is also relevant to the development and revision specific.
of a financial payment mechanism. o Application and
• Precise point at which a contract for exploitation evaluation criteria for a
commences needs to be specified. substantive review.
• It is suggested (from the Stakeholder Survey) that a o Application and
substantive review period occur at approximately 5 years evaluation criteria for
into the contract term. The specific conditions attached to renewal of an
that review should be established at the time of the initial exploitation contract.
application for a plan of work for exploitation.
• It may be possible to approve stages of exploitation
operations. In the early phases of this industry, the nature
of the deposit may require a gradual procession to
commercial production. If it subsequently comes to light
that the deposit extent is less than originally forecast, the
duration (or size of area) needs to be adjusted.
Uneconomic production and recovery is to be avoided: this
may be difficult to prove e.g. where recovery is strategic
23

[Page 24]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
and not economic? Perhaps better wording to avoid
“inefficient and harmful production”?
• Commencement of mining: as soon as possible but a
logical development of production areas within the
exploitation area leading to maximum economic recovery
plus development of infrastructure and transporting and
processing construction.
• As to periods of renewal / extension, thought will need to
be given as to whether this should be treated as a “fresh”
application and subject to identical rules of process and
procedure as the original application? Bearing in mind the
inclusive and participative approach being taken.
• A starting point for the regulations could be:
o Specify a maximum initial period;
o Define the parameters of any renewal against
specified criteria (depletion of ore, commercial
viability, contractor not in material default) and
documentation needs;
o Provide for a substantive review period at the end
of first 5 years based on pre-determined
performance and other criteria and included in the
contract – with the ability of the Authority to adjust
terms etc.
o And other review periods at pre-defined
timeframes or triggered on the happening of
specific events.
• Security of tenure34, stability and certainty within the legal
framework is a key investor requirement. This also extends
to a full understanding as to what circumstances
exploitation contracts may be terminated, potential
conditions applied at periodic reviews, transferability of a
34 Article 153(6) of the Convention specifically recognizes security of tenure and that no contract is to be revised, suspended or terminated except in accordance
with Annex III, Penalties (article 18) and Revision of Contract (article 19).
24

[Page 25]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
contract for exploitation etc.
• Guidelines for the evaluation of
Performance This draft • Under the Convention35, the Authority is obliged to
Production performance
requirements regulation “establish a maximum time interval, after the exploration
requirements under a contract for
should specify stage is completed and the exploitation stage begins, to
exploitation to be drafted. To
the production achieve commercial production”. Allowance here is to be
include key performance criteria
obligations given for construction time and unavoidable delays. This
and indicators.
under a plan of may also need to factor in environmental approvals.
• Council to consider as a matter
work. • Then following commercial production, “the Authority shall
of policy, in discussion with
within reasonable limits and taking into consideration all
relevant stakeholders, whether a
relevant factors require the operator to maintain
cut-off point for commercial
commercial production throughout the period of the plan of
inactivity should be established,
work”. Need to elaborate on taking into consideration all
taking account of the nature of
relevant factors. That is, in practice, what factors will
any inactivity.
potentially delay, halt or suspend commercial production?
• No subsidization: how will this be
Technical and economic conditions will be one factor.
defined, identified and eliminated
Equally, no “right” of the Authority to force uncommercial
in practice? More likely to occur
activity.
during “strategic” rather than
• The mining plan and estimated date of commercial
commercial mining?
production will be assessed during the evaluation phase
• Commercial inactivity: flexibility
(Feasibility study). The approved Feasibility study locks the
to respond to changes in market
contractor in to the production undertakings in that study.
conditions.
• A cut-off point needs to be adopted where no commercial
activity has taken place and to afford other operators the
opportunity of developing the resources in that area. The
US Deep Seabed Hard Minerals Act provides a cut-off
point of 10 years, unless a contractor can show just cause
(define criteria).36 Equally, for any periods of inactivity,
should the contractor be required to pay a surface rent?
Arguably, yes but at what rate / level? For further
35 Annex III Article 17(2)(c) of the Convention.
36 See 30 U.S. Code § 1417, Duration of licenses and permits. The use of this reference to the US Deep Seabed Hard Minerals Act has been criticized, as the Act
is not “operational”. However, it is merely to serve as a reference rather than absolute until detailed discussion is concluded.
25

[Page 26]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
discussion but account to be taken of nature of inactivity
e.g. economic downturn and where operation is put on
“care and maintenance”.
• Also provision should be made for a contractor to apply for
a suspension in commercial production due to say
economic conditions (see also Revision clause in the
contract).
• Performance requirements expected of the contractor are
key and arguably form fundamental terms of the contract.
Flowing from the Feasibility study, key performance criteria
and indicators should be established. Guidelines will be
needed. For example, the Feasibility study should provide
production estimates for the mining operation; where
recovery falls below such agreed estimates by a pre-
determined percentage, the Authority should be in a
position to require the contractor to improve the efficiency
etc. of the mining operation.
• From a commercial perspective, a contractor should be
permitted to make minor changes to an approved
programme of activities without recourse to the Authority.
However, any material changes should require the
Authority’s prior approval. The distinction between minor
and material should be discussed and agreed during the
application and approval process and also reflected in any
guidelines (definition / criteria for material and minor).
• It is usual in a land-based mining context that an operator
is required to undertake capacity tests of the mining
equipment. Again, this needs to be considered.
• The following could also be included in this section:
o Production takes place in accordance with sound
commercial principles (see “Consideration by the
Legal and Technical Commission” above);
o No subsidization of activities;
26

[Page 27]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
o No discrimination;
o Stipulate Council’s powers to investigate and take
measures.
• A policy in respect of resource
Avoidance of General • To permit the Authority to impose reasonable conditions
waste management needs to be
unnecessary obligation to and / or issue guidelines to achieve “in accordance with
developed.
waste in avoid sound principles of conservation, the avoidance of
respect of the unnecessary unnecessary waste’.37
resources of waste. • Visibility of processing and treatment of the ore should be
the Area stipulated.
• ISA to elaborate intentions /
Use of sub- To specify the • Contractor’s right to sub-contract but also contractors to
operationalization of this
contractors obligations on a extract the necessary guarantees for sub-contractor
element. Parallels with land-
contractor performance.
based regimes to be considered.
where sub- • The use of sub-contractors should be addressed in the
contractors are Feasibility study – full disclosure.
engaged.
• Discussions between the
Vessels To specify the • Requirement for vessels engaged in exploitation activities
Authority and the International
operating in obligations on a to remain in Class and be subject to general international
Maritime Organization to be
the Area contractor in legal obligations and appropriate conventions.
formalised.
relation to • Need to establish clear line of duties and responsibilities
vessels and co-operation between the Authority and the
undertaking International Maritime Organization (IMO).
activities in the
Area.
• Discussions between the
Protection of To specify the • Procedures to be established to notify submarine cable
Authority and relevant
submarine obligations on operator organizations of a plan of work application
representative organizations
cables and all parties showing co-ordinates of proposed exploitation area(s).
formalised.
pipelines including • Reporting / notification protocols to be established.
• Joint report / technical study (ISA
37 Article 150(b) Convention. The Exploitation RRPs will also need to address other “waste” streams. Waste stream categories must be defined and addressed
accordingly.
27

[Page 28]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
notification Technical Study No 14) prepared
procedures.38 by the ICPC / ISA following a
joint workshop held in NYC on
10-11 March 2015. Available at
https://www.isa.org.jm/document/
submarine-cables-and-deep-
seabed-mining
• To determine additional
Health and To specify the • To establish what supplementary duties and obligations
international / DSM-specific
safety additional the Authority has as a regulator in connection with health
standards and the extent of the
measures that and safety together with applicable standards.
Authority’s remit / duties and
supplement • Training of employees in health and safety procedures.
responsibilities.
existing • Labour standards also require consideration (International
international Labour Organization).
agreements.39
• Implementation of safety zones and other obligations
under Article 147 Convention (IMO / ISA roles).
• Regulator to promote occupational health and safety.
• To establish areas of skills and
Training Training • To be submitted as part of the documentation
talent shortages key to the
obligations on a requirements on application for a plan of work.
development of the DSM
contractor. • Thought to be given to the needs of the future industry and
industry.
training programmes targeted accordingly. Training
obligations could also be facilitated under the requirements
of a Social impact assessment and contribution, that is,
incremental training programmes including tertiary
scholarships etc.
• Note: training obligations of contractor personnel too in
matters of occupational health and safety etc.
• Guidelines on Procedures and
Periodic As per content • Periodic review at 5-year intervals. Contractor is / may be
Information Requirements for
38 Arguably an obligation for sponsoring States to have RRPs in place as well. See Article 113 of the Convention.
39 See Article 146 of the Convention. Relevant international agreements / practices include: International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea and International
Management Code for the Safe Operation of Ships and for Pollution Prevention (IMO).
28

[Page 29]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
review of the of Exploration obliged to implement / adjust its programme of activities for Review to be drafted.
implementatio Regulations. the next five year period (adaptive management
n of the plan of approach).
work for • Greater clarity and guidance will be needed over the
exploitation substance and content of these reviews for exploitation
programmes. Conditions and criteria of any review should
be clearly stipulated in any guidelines. Clearer indication /
picture of ISA’s regulatory role required here.
• Additionally certain events will require notification and
perhaps the production of incident or exception reports.
For example, if commercial production falls below average
targets, casualties or the achievement of milestones. Must
define events subject to notification and determine the
exact nature of the regulatory role in this context. Specific
conditions may be imposed which require more regular
reporting. Reporting is obviously a key area of governance
under the regime but it needs to be targeted and relevant
to the Authority’s role as regulator.
• To establish clarity on post
Termination of As per • What obligations remain with the contractor post
termination obligations for a
sponsorship Exploration termination? Does a contractor remain liable for say EMP
contractor. ISA to prepare /
Regulations. monitoring obligations?
commission a study of options
• Monitoring of EMP, mitigation until such time pre-agreed
available.
standards or criteria are met? Who will carry out
monitoring?
• Legal workshop required to
Responsibility As per • Wording of the Exploration Regulations principally reflects
explore and develop further
and liability Exploration the Convention.40 The liability of the contractor is for
principles of responsibility and
Regulations. wrongful acts. There is also an overlap in responsibility
liability in the Area. Stakeholders
and liability under the laws of a sponsoring State. Strict
wish to see this prioritized.
liability may be imposed under national law.
• The area of liability and redress in the Area particularly as
40 Annex III, Article 22.
29

[Page 30]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
regards environmental damage remains at an embryonic
stage of development.41 Calls for a separate working group
to look at this issue were made in the Stakeholder Survey.
• Questions to be addressed could include:
o When there should be liability;
o What the basis is for liability;
o The appropriate attribution of fault e.g. strict
liability or otherwise;
o The availability of damages and the limitation of
liability;
o Financial security; and
.
o Compensation mechanism
Part IV Protection and preservation of the marine environment
• This area requires the formation
Protection and General wording • Acknowledgement of the general principles and obligations
of targeted expert workgroups
preservation of in Exploration within the exploration regulations should remain. That is,
consisting of a broad range of
the marine Regulations to application of the precautionary approach, BEP, measures
stakeholders, including relevant
environment be adapted. to control pollution. Should also specify an adaptive
international organizations.
management approach as part of BEP.
• Specific consideration of
• A vast amount of work needs to be performed in this area
“dumping” RRPs.
from agreeing the thresholds of serious harm to the
• Waste Assessment Guidance
efficacy of PRZs and IRZs, developing workable
developed under Annex 2 of the
environmental targets and indicators and the application of
Protocol of potential relevance.
a precautionary-risk management framework. Prescriptive
To include requirements for a
regulations and detailed guidelines will be the ultimate
waste assessment and waste
output here; however, it is too early to draft the same
assessment prevention audit.
without input from experts, interested stakeholders,
IMO / ISA co-operation. New
relevant international organizations (e.g. IMO in respect of
Zealand government have also
marine pollution) and knowledge advancement.
expressed an interest in
• Dumping: the 1972 London Convention42 and the 1996
41 The Seabed Disputes Chamber of the ITLOS noted “[a]rticle 304…opens the liability regime for deep seabed mining to new developments in international law”,
either under the existing regime or under customary international law. This is further endorsed by the Convention which obliges the ISA Assembly to promote
“international co-operation concerning activities in the Area” and to encourage “the progressive development of international law relating thereto”.
30

[Page 31]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Protocol to the London Convention currently exclude the contributing to the development
dumping of wastes or other matter connected with seabed of specific RRPs for waste
mining activities from its scope. More specifically Article management.
1(4)(3) of the 1996 Protocol states “[t]he disposal or
storage of wastes or other matter directly arising from, or
related to the exploration, exploitation and associated off-
shore processing of seabed mineral resources is not
covered by the provisions of this Protocol”.
• It would thus seem that the disposal or storage of waste or
other matter directly arising from “activities in the Area” will
need to be regulated by the Authority as the competent
agency / international body. What will constitute “dumping”
in the Area? E.g. the deliberate disposal of sediment from
on-board processing and vessels and mining collector in
emergency situations? What protection measures will be
needed (possible co-operation between the Authority and
the IMO)? Regulations should be drafted and the terms for
say an EMP should / could reflect specific waste
assessment framework(s), monitoring and reporting
obligations connected with the dumping of waste (as
defined).
• Objectives-based regulations rather than prescriptive
measures?
• Specific guidelines on
Environmental To • The OSPAR Guidelines for Monitoring the Environmental
environmental management
management operationalize Impact of Offshore Oil and Gas Activities (2004-11)
systems to be developed.
the EMP. provide a sound basis and guide aimed at environmental
• Flexible approach to auditing
monitoring (the design and conduct of monitoring
depending on performance
programmes) of discharges from oil and gas activities. This
• Objectives-based environmental
can be adapted for the specific requirements of
management endorsed: control
exploitation activities together with other relevant best
measures and associated
practice identified in the Stakeholder Survey and through
42 Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter.
31

[Page 32]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
future expert / workshop engagement. OSPAR Guidelines performance standards and
could be a good starting point but caution that they are measurement criteria to be
formulated for shallower waters and better understood developed / defined.
environments than the broad scale environmental impacts
of DSM. Other guideline e.g ICES guidelines for marine
aggregate extraction could be relevant.
• This regulation should oblige the contractor to have an
internationally recognized environmental management
system (EMS) in place e.g. ISO 14001: 2004.
• Specialists should conduct independent audits say every 2
years for the EMP and EMS.
• Any material revisions to an EMP to require the prior
approval of the Authority. Criteria / definition for material
required.
• Contractors should, in addition to their reporting obligations
to the Authority, make available a public annual statement
of its environmental targets and its performance delivery
against environmental indicators.
• Secretariat to review
Emergency As per • This is an area that requires further detailed input as to its
contemporary best practice in the
orders Exploration practical operation. While the rationale behind emergency
field of marine disaster
Regulations. measures is sound, its practical application may be limited.
management and responding to
Consequently, a focus on and during the application,
emergency situations including
reporting, inspection and review processes of contractor
the lessons learned.
risk management systems and processes will be of greater
• Consider working group with IMO
significance, including a contractor’s Emergency response
and relevant regional
and procedures plan. While this regulation is targeted at
organizations.
the protection of the marine environment, human health
32

[Page 33]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
and safety is of fundamental importance.
• Can draw on much existing best practice where relevant,43
including reporting protocols.
• Set up specialized technical committee? Also consider
power to hold commission of inquiry into incidents in co-
operation with IMO etc.
• Work plan / terms of reference to
Strategic The requirement • This regulation would place an obligation on the Authority
be scoped for developing
environmental to conduct to conduct a Strategic environmental impact
SEMPs.
management regional SEIAs assessment(s) of the Area and to develop Strategic
• Regional workshops and co-
plan (SEMP) and deliver environmental management plan(s) (SEMPs) including the
operation to be developed to
regional development of APEI’s. Importance of SEA to identify
formulate regional SEMPs.
SEMPs. cumulative impacts.
• This is seen as a priority area by
• The issue of regional SEMPs for the Area drew much
many stakeholders.
discussion from stakeholders and the need to have
• Note: care and consistency in
SEMPs in place prior to commercial exploitation.
use of terms e.g. strategic
• The regulation should specify the objectives of the SEMPs.
environmental assessment
• Regional SEMPs to include social impact assessment.
versus strategic environmental
• See also contractor EMP obligations under Part II above: a
impact assessment. Terminology
need for co-operation and harmonization of SEMP and
needs to be clearly defined /
contractor EMP deliverables.
internationally accepted
terminology to be used.
• None at this stage.
Rights of The wording • Reference to any likely impacts on coastal states should
coastal States from the be addressed in the EIS, where considered significant.
Exploration See also “Size and location of exploitation area(s) covered
Regulations by the plan of work” above.
remains
relevant.
43 For example, stakeholders suggested: International Convention on oil pollution preparedness, response and cooperation, 1990; IMO Pollution Incident
Response Planning Resolutions MEPC.54(32) & MEPC.85(44); EPA (US) Area Contingency Planning Handbook and EU Directive 2012/18/EU on control of
major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances.
33

[Page 34]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
• The interaction between
Environmental To provide for a • The necessity for a bond or related performance guarantee
commercial insurance and bond
bonds and bond or financial requires detailed consideration together with the form that
mechanisms needs to be
performance guarantee any bond / guarantee should take: cash deposit, parent
investigated together with the
guarantees where company guarantee, State guarantee, financial institution
terms and conditions, including
requested by letter of credit – and associated investment grade of any
appropriate quantum of any
the Authority. issuer. Cash bonds are preferable. The terms of its release
bond.
and what can be deducted against the deposit must be
• Mixed endorsement: if where
established.
proposed, needs clear
• For commercial operators there is generally a preference
parameters to establish a viable
for commercial insurance rather than bonds.
model.
• Importance of equality of financial treatment and
comparable financial obligations across the contractor
base.
• Not all jurisdictions request a bond in practice under
mining regimes but may make provision in their regulations
for a bond, particularly to secure any closure obligations
(restoration / rehabilitation). In the case of activities in the
Area these obligations may be minimal (save for any post
closure monitoring) and a cash bond or guarantee
connected with the performance of the EMP may be more
preferable. The rationale and purpose(s) of any proposed
bond mechanism requires discussion and should not cover
obligations regulated under other regimes. There may be
need to consider bond levels on a case-by-case basis
depending on the activities being undertaken in the Area
e.g. additional processing, higher bond?
34

[Page 35]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
• None at this stage.
Restoration A general • To include a general restoration obligation.44 Restoration to
• General disagreement / disfavor
and restoration occur where directed to do so by the Council. This would
to a general restoration
rehabilitation obligation where be based on the Commissions’ recommendations that
obligation. But, a suggestion to
of the marine restoration is would take account of the likely effectiveness of
include / consider in an EMP and
environment feasible seems techniques based on necessity; technical feasibility; and
/ or closure plan but not a legal
appropriate. cost-efficiency on the basis of a cost benefit analysis,
obligation at this stage of
where such quantification can be reasonably assessed.
development? General
• Restoration will also be impacted by “passive
consensus by stakeholders for
rehabilitation”, that is, the ability for natural recovery to
focus to be on impact
occur.
minimisation and mitigation
• “Restoration” & “rehabilitation” will require appropriate legal
measures rather than restoration
/ scientific definition in a marine environment context.
at this time.
• Adaptive management in
Adaptive A regulation that • All actors to adopt an adaptive management approach to
connection with exploitation
management better defines exploitation activities. Adaptive management may include:-
activities in the Area requires
approach adaptive • The permitting of exploitation operations to proceed on
further elaboration with
management. a smaller scale or for shorter defined periods of time in
interested parties through a
order to assess impacts on the environment and on
working group and incorporating
human health and safety;
discussion of a precautionary risk
• The duration of any approval of an EMP;
management framework.
• The frequency of review periods to be imposed by the
• The New Zealand Government
Authority; and
has offered to work with the ISA
• Additional reporting obligations under an EMP.
given its recent regulatory
• Note: this approach should be balanced with the
development and marine consent
commercial (economic) viability of operations
experience.
(principles of sustainable development). Development
• Adaptive management has now
of cost-benefit analysis models needed.
been reflected as a High-level
• Consider Canadian Environmental Assessment
issue.
Agency adaptive management model?
• A working paper / terms of
Seabed To establish a • The idea and rationale of a fund is for the Authority to be in
35

[Page 36]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
sustainability seabed a position, based on expert recommendations, to direct reference to be drafted
fund sustainability further research e.g. in relation to marine ecosystems in articulating the concept and
fund with the Area and to develop institutional capacities.45 At the objectives of such a fund for
targeted moment the Authority / Common heritage of mankind are circulation to interested parties.
objectives. in a “Catch 22” with no budget for large-scale research • Widespread appeal but: how /
activities. who will fund this? Is an ore levy
• The fund could be financed by way of a levy e.g. USD x equitable? Contributions as a %
per wet / dry ton of ore recovered on board the mining of investment? Funding
vessel. alternatives must be considered.
• Contributions to the fund could also be considered an
element of social contribution.
• The fund could target the development of technology,
which also presents a revenue stream opportunity for the
fund (e.g. patent royalties).
• Such a funds merit and appeal has yet to be tested but
there is a strong rationale for such a fund.
• None at this stage.
Environmental As • The rationale for such a fund stems from a potential
• To consider as part of
liability trust recommended environmental liability gap. The merit of such a fund was
“responsibility and liability”
fund by the Seabed presented in the Stakeholder Survey.
action?
Disputes • Given the suggested Seabed sustainability fund above, the
• IOPC Fund a potential
Chamber of the need for an additional fund requires consideration.
ITLOS.46 However, the rationale for this fund is different and could benchmark?
• General endorsement but further
be funded by allocating a portion of production royalties
discussion required, particularly
received by the Authority.
timing of set-up and funding
options.
45
The concept of such a fund originated from the Stakeholder Survey and is based on the Aggregates Levy Sustainability Fund in the United Kingdom. The
rationale for such a fund is also supported by other stakeholder comments including the development of a non-fault based mechanism for research in the deep sea
environment.
46 International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea: Case No. 17: Responsibilities and obligations of States sponsoring persons and entities with respect to activities in
the Area (Request for Advisory Opinion submitted to the Seabed Disputes Chamber).
36

[Page 37]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
• None at this stage but to be
Human The wording of • The SIA and action plan should address any specific
considered as part of SIA
remains and the Exploration matters relating to the cultural heritage in the exploitation
process.
objects and Regulations area(s).
sites of an remains
archaeological relevant.
or historical
nature
Part V Confidentiality
• Confidentiality is raised as a
Confidentiality The wording of • Amendment of the Exploration Regulation’s wording may
High-level issue.
of data and the Exploration be required in the light of any agreed public participation
information & Regulations and review processes. The principles of the EITI are also
Procedures to may be relevant. relevant here.
ensure • There is a call, within the Stakeholder Survey for a
confidentiality presumption that all data is public (including contracts for
exploitation etc.) unless demonstrated otherwise. This
would not extend, however, to confidential information and
data.
• Data flow and participation / review processes will drive
any amendment of the confidentiality provisions here. Best
practice is to be sought.
Part VI General procedures
• None.
Notice and The wording of • None.
general the Exploration
procedures Regulations
remains
relevant.
37

[Page 38]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
• The process of issuing
Recommendatio The wording of • This provision may need to be “updated” as to the
recommendations by the
ns for the the Exploration processes necessary to draft and adopt such
guidance of Regulations recommendations, including the necessity for expert input Commission needs review.
contractors
remains and review by interested parties where applicable.
relevant.
• None but see Summary of high
Duty to A general duty • A general regulation to stipulate the Authority’s obligation
level issues.
cooperate on all parties to to co-operate with a sponsoring State (and vice-versa)
• Needs operationalizing: specific
co-operate and where required. Member States should equally be under a
expectations / obligations?
exchange duty to co-operate and assist the Authority (and vice-
information is versa).
necessary. • A duty to co-operate with the Authority is not only essential
for “joint” investigation and enforcement of operational
obligations, but also of sharing information for financial
auditing purposes. In practical terms once an ore vessel
has left the Area, what “control” will the Authority have over
auditing for say royalty payments? Access by a Member
State to customs and related documentation when the
vessel arrives in a Member State port or shipments to the
treatment and processing plants will be crucial.
• Aside from “co-operation”, perhaps an exchange of
information provision is applicable here as well defining the
types of information that needs to be shared to allow the
Authority and Member States (and sponsoring States) to
discharge their duties to the common heritage of mankind.
• Strengthening co-operation with relevant organizations.
Part VII Enforcement, offences & penalties
• Develop a working paper setting
Inspection To include • The general wording of the Exploration Regulations
out a suggested structure and
inspection (contract) should be retained. However, the inspection
options, including funding, for the
regime in regime requires detailed input, an understanding of any
operation of an inspection
headline potential overlaps with sponsoring State regimes and its
regime, taking account of
38

[Page 39]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
regulations funding and independence. comments made in the
rather than • Use of best technology for remote supervision / Stakeholder Survey.
standard terms “inspection”.
of contract. • Need parameters for:
o What will be inspected?
o The qualifications of inspectors? Multi-disciplined
or specific focus?
o The training of inspectors?
o Production of an inspector’s manual.
o Code of Good Practice on integrity,
professionalism and transparency (see Paris MOU
/ Regional Port State Control).
• Option here for Member States to nominate their nationals
as inspectors. But for such nationals not to be permitted to
inspect operations involving their nationals or persons
under their control where a Member State is say a
sponsoring State.
• In a DSM context, could explore possibilities of
cooperation between the Authority’s Mining Inspectorate
and Regional PSC MOUs to collaborate on gathering and
sharing data on contractors’ compliance with their
obligations, including mining equipment certification and
standards (apparently being developed by classification
society ABS and maybe others), contingency, safety plans
and other plans relevant to the Mining Inspectorate.
• (See also ”Duty to co-operate” above, which will also be of
relevance here).
• Desktop review to be undertaken
Offences & Specific, • A specific list of offences to be included in the regulations,
on existing / comparable
penalties measurable as amended by the Council as appropriate. Parallels can
regimes.
offences to be be drawn from existing regimes.
• Interaction with sponsoring State
defined together • Penalties can either be included in an annex to the
offence and penalty regime to be
with associated regulations, as amendable by the Council.
understood.
• General characteristics: proportionality; escalation process
39

[Page 40]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
penalties. (i.e. warning process, agreement for remedial action;
enforcement notice; administrative penalty etc.). Penalties
ideally against measurable parameters (targets,
thresholds) rather than breaches of procedural
obligations?
Part VIII Disputes
• A technical working paper needs
Settlement of As per • Opportunity to consider “lower level” administrative
to be prepared to set out dispute
disputes Exploration appeals for the plan of work application process? That is, a
resolution options under the
Regulations. simpler appeal mechanism for the Commissions’
Convention.
recommendations on the outcome of a plan of work or its
constituent elements.
Part IX Resources other than [mineral category]
• None.
Resources other As per • None.
than [mineral Exploration
category] Regulations.
Part X Review
• None.
Review As per • Given the adaptive management approach, in the early
Exploration stages of development, the exploitation regulations will
Regulations. benefit from an annual evaluation.
40

[Page 41]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Annex II Contract for exploitation
A full analysis of the proposed standard clauses for a contract for exploitation is not given below. Many of the standard clauses including
development, production and performance obligations will flow from the headline regulations. However, there are 5 suggested provisions
below that require action and / or consideration.
Clause relating Commentary Action
to:-
“Dealings” or • A contractual clause (or regulation) may be needed to deal with any unfair or uneconomic Expert input required in
arrangements practices (Annex, Section 6 of the Agreement) that occur throughout the value chain. This needs connection with the
expert consideration but there could be agreements, transactions or arrangement that may development of RRPs (under
require the prior consent of / notification to the Authority (Council). the Agreement) relating to
• This is a specialist area and requires expert input. That said, transparency, exchange of unfair and / or uneconomic
information and co-operation will facilitate any appropriate obligations on the Contractor (and practices (in accordance with
Member States under the Agreement). the requirements of the
• Financial arrangements downstream may also impact the financial payment system depending Agreement). See also
on its final formulation, including non-arm’s length sales. “Undertakings” above.
Annual Reports • Guidelines will need to be prepared to determine the format and content of a contractor’s annual Guidelines for the
report to the Authority. Subject to specifically agreed confidentiality criteria, these should be made Preparation of Annual
publicly available (or as a minimum, part thereof) under the transparency principle. Reports to be drafted.
• There also needs to be standardization in reporting. A template(s) needs to be devised for this
purpose together with an analysis of actual performance against previously agreed performance
indicators.
• Though this clause speaks to “Annual Reports”, there will be other specific contractor reporting
obligations under the regulations.
41

[Page 42]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Clause relating Commentary Action
to:-
Insurance • Requirement to maintain insurance in accordance with approved plan of work. Annual evidence Discussions with contractors,
required. the insurance industry (P&I
• Requirement to maintain with “financially sound and reputable insurers” – consistent with Good clubs) and other stakeholders
Mining Industry Practice. This is a specialist area, not least when combined with environmental needed here to gain
liability insurance. Specific guidance and advice is required for the Authority to have a full knowledge and
understanding of products available, including deductibles, and their efficacy. understanding of insurance
• More prescriptive description of insurance requirements required. specifics, including
• See also “Environmental bonds and performance guarantees” above. limitations, exceptions and
exclusions.
Suspension and • Wording from Exploration Regulations to be retained. However, clarification needed over serious Technical paper to clarify
termination of persistent and wilful violations;47 and what are considered fundamental terms of the exploitation meaning of serious persistent
contract and
contract? and wilful violations based on
penalties
• Fundamental terms of the contract can be specifically defined in the contract. Serious and existing best practice in
persistent can be clarified in guidance notes reflecting a penalty regime. extractive industries.
Revision • The revision clause in the Exploration Regulations is of greater significance to exploitation Technical paper to clarify
contracts. meaning of inequitable,
• The clause is to be taken from Annex III, Article 19 of the Convention. As an immature industry, it impracticable and impossible
will be difficult to anticipate all eventualities. However, some guidance should be considered in referenced in Annex III,
terms of understanding the concepts of inequitable, impracticable and impossible contained in Article 19, Convention.
Annex III, Article 19.
• Equally, any review periods provided for in the regulations could ease the operation of this
contractual provision.
• Transparency of any agreed changes to the terms of a contract is key; hence a disclosure
provision should be reflected, subject to confidentiality provision.
• Could include suspension of operations for market conditions (note: obligations under an EMP to
continue).
47 Annex III, Article 18 of the Convention.
42

[Page 43]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
2. Summary of high level issues
43

[Page 44]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
1. Information and data – The Authority is currently operating in a data deficient environment, particularly as regards
what we know, what we resource data and environmental data. It is recommended that the Authority establish a fit-for-
don’t know, what we purpose data management strategy as a matter of priority. This is relevant for both the
need to know development of the regulatory framework and on-going informed decision-making.
2. Activities in the Area - Competencies of the Authority in the Area and those of other relevant competent international
Competence of the organizations to be identified in order to clarify areas of responsibility and identify possible gaps in
Authority and of other regulating activities in the Area.
relevant competent
international
organizations
3. The transition between Aside from the issue of the extension of contracts for exploration, two further issues are relevant.
exploration and First, the need to develop a process and procedures for prior environmental impact assessment for
exploitation phases specific activities undertaken under a contract for exploration.48 Secondly, for reasons of
commerciality, it is recommended that the concept of a provisional mining licence49, while having
some merit, is forgone and that a substantive review period against pre-determined performance
indicators is undertaken within a 5-year period from the commencement date of a contract for
exploitation.
Further work also needs to be undertaken to clarify the nature of a “preference and priority” and the
procedures to transfer the same into an “exclusive exploitation right”.
48 See IBSA/19/LTC/8.
49 See ISA Technical Study: No. 11 at page 4 for background.
44

[Page 45]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
4. Risk assessment, The development of risk assessment and risk management standards and systems (for
evaluation and environmental, occupational health and safety and operational risk) is fundamental to the orderly
management development of activities in the Area. It is recommended that the Authority gains a better
understanding of the risk profile (hazards and classification) of anticipated exploitation operations
through dialogue with contractors and other relevant experts plus ability to draw on existing risk
frameworks in related sectors, including oil and gas.50 Risk is best managed by contractors.
Industry to be encouraged to collaborate in risk assessment and management matters?
5. Time limits and costs The need for certainty and fairness in the regulatory process points toward clearly prescribed time
limits. Time-scales can be benchmarked against best practice mining regimes and be modified to
take account of the decision-making structure of the Authority. Equally, the operation of the
framework must be cost-effective and the sharing of its costs discussed. For clarification, this high
level issue points to timelines in the application, associated review and appeal processes /
mechanisms; the industry must have certainty over when decisions will be made while any public
review processes must be afforded reasonable timelines for comment.
6. Confidentiality A tension could exist between the existing confidentiality provisions contained in the Exploration
Regulations51 and the transparency demands of an exploitation framework, particularly public
access to relevant data and information and participation in the environmental decision-making
process.52 There is a growing call in the extractive industries for greater levels of transparency
through information disclosure53 and a presumption that information relating to contracts and
50 Other assessment frameworks recommended by stakeholders includes: Assessment Framework for Scientific Research Involving Ocean Fertilization LC 32/15,
annex 6 (IMO parties); Specific Guidelines for the Assessment of Carbon Dioxide for Disposal into Sub-seabed Geological Formation LC32/15 annex 8.
51 See Regulations 36 and 37 PN Exploration Regulations.
52 See The UNECE Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters, Aarhus, 25 June
1998. See also IFC Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability, January 2012.
53 For example, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
45

[Page 46]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
activities under contracts is publicly available54, save for confidential information.55 The issue of
publicly available information and meaningful stakeholder participation in the decision-making
processes is a policy matter for the Authority in discussion with interested stakeholders.
This issue should be prioritised. Given the number of views expressed by stakeholders, a technical
paper is required to set out the legal position and possible options based on best practice and
trends. Alternatively, an option(s) may be proposed in the draft exploitation regulations for
consideration by stakeholders together with appropriate commentary. It should be emphasised that
there is general consensus by stakeholders on the public availability of environmental data and
information and acknowledgement of a transparent process.
7. Effective protection for The importance of a number of environmental protection and mitigation tools under the Convention
the marine environment and the procedural obligations to deliver the same is vital. It is recognised that the Authority and
from harmful effects other actors should adopt an ecosystem-based approach to environmental management in the
Area. Additionally, it is recognised that specific criteria and guidance must be developed for
concepts such as “significant adverse change” and “vulnerable marine ecosystems”; to this end the
Authority can draw upon existing best practice definitions56 and work already in progress across
the stakeholder base. Specifically, some stakeholders have stressed a priority requirement for,
inter alia:
1. The development of an Environmental impact assessment process; and
2. The development of Strategic envionmental (impact) assessments and Strategic
environmental management plans (regional). The importance of cumulative impacts is
highlighted together with the harmonisation / integration of SEAs / SEMPs with project-
specific EISs and EMPs.
54 Model Mine Development Agreement, MMDA 1.0, International Bar Association.
55 Relating to “commercial”, “economic”, “property” and “business secrets” etc.
56 For example, under the UN FAO International Guidelines for the Management of Deep-Sea Fisheries in the High Seas and the Convention on Biological
Diversity’s criteria for Ecologically or Biologically Significant Marine Areas (EBSAs).
46

[Page 47]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
8. Adaptive management This will require detailed input from relevant stakeholders. As observed by one stakeholder,
recognising a staged approach to exploitation is one thing but it is a challenge to achieve in
practice where due consideration needs to be given to an operator’s economic viability. In view of
exploration activity and investments already made, balancing respective interests here may be
difficult.
The New Zealand Government has made a further offer to work with the ISA to elaborate the
approach to adaptive management in the exploitation framework. Perhaps following this, a working
group on adaptive management and the application of the precautionary approach can be
developed. A broader range of opinions and input toward adaptive management will ultimately be
required.
9. “Internationally Standard(s) development as part of good mining industry practice57 is a pre-requisite to the orderly
recognized standards” development of the industry and a key consideration for the regulatory framework across a broad-
and their significance in range of subject matter. The content and credibility of industry standards should be delivered
exploitation activities through consensus-building and a multi-stakeholder approach to reflect best available science and
technical information where applicable. Many international standards58, including those developed
in the oil and gas sector, will be directly applicable to exploitation activities. Indeed many standards
have been suggested by stakeholders.59 Others will require modification and development.
Standard(s) development should, primarily, be an industry-driven initiative.60 An objection has been
voiced to this last statement. However, focus should be placed on the word “primarily”; this does
not mean “exclusively”. It is fundamental that the industry buys into and initiates the development
57 See Annex III, Article 17(1)(b)(xii) of the Convention relating to the adoption and application of mining standards and practices.
58 Also need to consider regional or country standards which may be equivalent to, based on or have a higher level of standard. E.g. EU Regulation (EC) No
761/2001 Eco-management and audit scheme (EU).
59 For example: Code for Environmental Management of Marine Mining (IMMS); ISO 14001; ISO 9001/9002; ANZI Z10 or OHAS 18001 (health and safety
management system-related).
60 Ultimately standards will need to be backed-up by the necessary regulatory checks and balances: reporting, notification, inspection and independent audit
obligations and procedures. That is, a general question of how standards will be enforced.
47

[Page 48]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
of standards as these will have economic impact. Standard development would however be
subject to multi-stakeholder input and dialogue.
10. Sponsoring State(s) and It is not believed that the division of duties and responsibilities is clearly defined between a
the Authority – a clear sponsoring State and the Authority. This relates to matters including enforcement and monitoring /
division of duties and inspection, offence and penalty systems, liability and responsibility of a contractor etc. From a
responsibilities? contractor’s perspective there is the potential for a duplicative regulatory and financial burden. This
needs to be clarified and duties and responsibilities more clearly defined. Equally, this also points
to effective co-operation between the Authority and a sponsoring State.
Matrix setting out duties and responsibilities to be developed.
11. “High-grading” of mineral The issue of “high-grading” was addressed in the Stakeholder Survey and drew a number of
deposits diverging stakeholder opinions including: that a grading policy should be a matter for commercial
determination; that low-grade mining could become economical over time as technology develops
and that high-grading potentially minimizes the environmental footprint (“untouched” lower grade
areas). Other stakeholders made reference to the exploitation of an “average balanced grade”. The
issue of grading policy needs further consideration with interested parties, including “typical” break-
even cut-off grades (economic and technical feasibility) and environmental policy considerations.
Many, if not the majority of responses reflect this to be solely a commercial issue and that it is not
appropriate to set a breakeven cut-off grade. Diverging stakeholder opinions remain in respect of
this high level issue. There are a number of other areas within the draft framework that point
toward the need to discuss the ISA’s position, as regulator, in connection with the regulation of
commercial activities and determining “commercial viability”. This high level issue also links to the
development of a financial mechanism. Financial terms can have an impact on the economic
behaviour of future exploitation operators. In connection with High level issue no. 16, how do other
comparable regimes handle, assess or oversee these issues?
12. Other: existing best Other aspects of relevance include the need to draw on existing best practice and not to “reinvent
48

[Page 49]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
High level issue Commentary
practice, learnings, co- the wheel” and to identify any defects and learnings from the current exploration application and
operation and implementation process, including new ways of doing business identified by the Commission.
information-sharing Additionally, the general need for co-operation and information sharing will be fundamental to the
effective operation of the regulatory framework.
13. ISA stakeholder The development / drafting of a clear and simple communication, transparency and participation
consultation strategy by the Authority. The “who, how and when” will the Authority engage with Members and all
stakeholders.
14. Mining inspectorate / This issue was originally “excluded” from a current work plan. However, a number of stakeholders
directorate61 / wish to understand the context / practicalities of how the Authority will manage and administer
environmental regulator activities: what authority will a mining directorate be given? How and when will enforcement
measures be taken including cure periods? This review must also include the need for a mining
registry and the registration of security interests by financial instiutions where applicable.
Appropriate land-based / oil and gas regulatory regimes should be benchmarked, including staffing
and resourcing requirements. Member States are kindly requested to offer any guidance or
assitance in this area.
15. An interim framework The basic draft framework at Section 2 of this document is a starting point to facilitate constructive
dialogue with stakeholders and to aid identification of further areas of study and expert input. As a
consequence of 1. above, the framework will remain very much “work-in-progress” until such time
as knowledge gaps can be filled.
16. One exploitation It is recommended at this stage that the core rules, regulations and procedures (RRPs) are set out
framework? in one over-arching framework. Resource-specific RRPs can be developed at a later stage.
However, an initial focus will be placed on a regulatory framework for polymetallic nodules.
61 Although the duties and responsibilities of the Authority as a regulator are not specifically defined, the Convention provides broad powers for exercising control
“as is necessary (Article 153(4)) and “incidental powers” under Article 157(2).
49

[Page 50]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
3. Draft action plan / priority deliverables
This section 3 contains (1) a summary of priority deliverables for the next 12-18 months that the Commission will present
to the Council during its 21st Session and (2) a revised Action plan and prioritization, based on stakeholder comments.
The Commission proposes that further work is performed on the Action plan, including target / realistic milestone dates62
and a full costing as its delivery will inter alia be dependent on adequate resources being made available.
62 In March 2015, the Action plan attempted to identify priority areas in a simple way by means of priority initiation dates, being the anticipated upcoming meetings
of the Commission. Namely: Priority A: Initiate by July 2015; Priority B: Initiate by February 2016 and Priority C: No action anticipated at this time.
50

[Page 51]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Exploitation code: Priority deliverables for the next 12-­‐18 months
Task area Commentary
1. A zero draft of This is vital to provide a higher degree of legal certainty to facilitate investment decisions being made by
exploitation investors and define key exploitation rights, contract duration, size of exploitation area etc. and related
regulations and obligations, including environmental obligations. It is intended that the drafting be undertaken by an expert
standard contract working group (external consultants), including Secretariat personnel. An initial draft deliverable to the
terms based on the Commission in February 2016 will be circulated to stakeholders in March 2016 and presented to the Council
working structure in July 2016 together with next steps.
agreed by the
Commission
2. Financial modeling To develop a payment mechanism for exploitation activities, detailed financial and economic models based
for proposed on proposed business plans are needed. External consultants will be required here. This is a key priority for
Financial terms contractors and the Authority.
and payment
mechanism
3. Data management The Secretariat is to produce a fully costed data management strategy and technical implementation plan
strategy and plan based on the advice of the Commission by February 2016. The project is likely to require significant funding
in the next biennium budget.
4. Environmental The Authority must develop an environmental impact assessment process and develop its current draft
assessment and environmental impact statement for adoption by contractors. Additionally, the Authority must develop a
management strategy for strategic (regional) environmental management plans, building on its experience with the
establishment of an environmental management plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone. These areas require
Terms of Reference but are likely to require input from external experts and / or working group(s) /
workshop(s) in the next 12-18 months, as well as significant financial resources in the next budgetary cycle.
51

[Page 52]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
5. Adaptive A key tool for environmental protection. The New Zealand Government has offered to work with the
management Authority to develop this.
approach
6. “Serious harm” A key term in the exploration and future exploitation codes. This needs to be operationalized through
background studies, expert input and subsequent review workshop.
7. Responsibility and Legal working group (external experts) will need to be formed to explore and develop further rules and
liability principles. The process will be kick started in the next 12-18 months by a study to be commissioned from
external consultants but is seen as a long-term project.
52

[Page 53]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Preamble • To be drafted as part of zero draft of exploitation regulations. A
Use of terms and scope • This section will evolve as the regulatory framework evolves. Definitions should reflect internationally agreed A
and accepted definitions where possible. Involvement of marine jurists and linguists.
Form of applications • Guidelines for the Preparation of a Plan of Work for Exploitation need drafting, including a standard B
application form.
C
• Development / licensing of an online application management system.
• Thought to be given to “new ways of doing business” as highlighted by the Commission in the context of A
exploration and its impact(s) on exploitation applications.
A
• Explanation of “new ways of doing business” to be articulated by the Commission.
Financial and technical • Guidelines for the Preparation and Evaluation of information relating to Financial capability and Technical B
capabilities capability to be drafted. These can reflect best practice from national regimes and detailed responses in the
Stakeholder Survey.
Previous contracts with the • The term “preference and priority” needs to be clarified (Secretariat). A
Authority
Undertakings • A working paper requires preparation by an expert familiar with the international trade issues raised by B
Annex, Section 6(1)(b) of the Agreement and specific RRPs drafted as required by Section 6(6) Agreement.
Equity interest in a joint venture • Action plan for operationalization of the Enterprise to be developed. C
arrangement
Feasibility study • Guidelines for the Preparation and Evaluation (criteria) of a Feasibility study to be drafted. Take contents of B
TS No. 11 as starting point.
• Have any “blueprint” feasibility studies been developed for exploitation activities which can be adopted by
the Authority? (To ensure consistency and comparability in applications).
Environmental impact statement • EIA process(es) need to be outlined. Guidelines for Environmental impact assessment process / Best A
53

[Page 54]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
practice manual to be drafted. May require working group.
• Draft EIS template in Technical Study No.10 to be reviewed and updated. Use SPC-EU DSM Project EIS
A
template as starting point and circulate to stakeholders.
• Guidelines for the Preparation and Evaluation of an Environmental Impact Statement to be drafted. Should B
include simple rating criteria (e.g. US EPA rating criteria). Needs to be resource-category specific.
Environmental management plan • EMP template needs to be drafted. Post EIA / EIS development above. B
• Guidelines for the Preparation and Evaluation of an Environmental management plan to be drafted.
• Similar to EIS, it is recommended that the above be undertaken by an expert and a draft template and
guidelines circulated for comment by interested parties.
• Guidelines for the design and monitoring of Preservation Reference Zones and Impact Reference Zones to
be developed. This may require an expert working group.
• Possible multi-stakeholder workshop(s) post development of EIS and EMP templates.
Social impact assessment and • Discussion to be advanced on a social action plan for the Area and a call to stakeholders to make A
action plan contributions to this discussion. If integrated with EIS,should be part of above EIA / EIS process above.
Financing plan • Template Financing plan to be drafted (content requirements). C
Closure plan • Template closure plan and Guidelines for the Preparation and Implementation of a Closure plan (including B
post-decommissioning surveys and monitoring) to be drafted.
Size of exploitation area covered • There are matters of policy to be addressed by the Council and stakeholders. Specific guidelines where A
by the plan of work applicable then need to be drawn up to identify the criteria to be applied in assessing the size and location of
exploitation area(s). It is likely that additional expert input is required here and / or initial thoughts of
contractors as to their proposed exploitation areas and production requirements.
Public review of the • A working paper needs to be drafted setting out the public participation options and procedures available, B
environmental impact statement including independent expert review(s), based on stakeholder submissions and best practice regimes. The
and environmental management paper must then be circulated to stakeholders for comment.
plan [and social impact
54

[Page 55]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
assessment and closure plan]
Consideration by the Legal and • Detailed guidelines will be needed in respect of evaluation criteria to be used by the Commission. B
Technical Commission • A technical working paper needs to be drafted to elaborate on the concept of sound commercial principles
B
(see 1994 Agreement, Annex, Section 6(1)(a)).
• A technical working paper is required to elaborate on substantial evidence of risk of serious harm to the A/B
marine environment in the case of area(s) disapproved for exploitation.
Consideration and approval of • Should any specific Council procedures and criteria be developed here? Yes. To be included in assessment C
plans of work for exploitation by / approval procedures for Council.
the Council
The Contract • Authority to provide an indication of “likely” specific conditions which may be imposed / agreed. A
Rights of the contractor • Consideration to be given to this by the Secretariat (clarity on rights being granted). Proposed language to A
be included in zero draft of exploitation regulations.
Obligations of the Authority • Consideration to be given to this by the Secretariat (clarity on Authority’s obligations). First question, are B
there any examples of gaps or ambiguities beyond Convention / Agreement in the obligations of the
Authority? Secretariat to clarify.
Legal title to minerals • Consideration of the phrase “recovery in accordance with the Convention” requires a technical working A
paper to be drafted.
Duration of contracts • Further understanding of contractor development and production models and plans is required here. A
• A balance needs to be established between the commercial requirements of contractors and the ability of the
Authority to amend terms and conditions in accordance with revised RRPs.
• A working paper needs to be developed for circulation to stakeholders.
• Guidelines need to be developed for the following:
o Criteria for contract duration – resource specific.
o Application and evaluation criteria for a substantive review.
55

[Page 56]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
o Application and evaluation criteria for renewal of an exploitation contract.
Performance requirements • Guidelines for the evaluation of Production performance requirements under a contract for exploitation to be C
drafted. To include key performance criteria and indicators.
A
• Council to consider as a matter of policy, in discussion with relevant stakeholders, a cut-off point for
commercial inactivity. Address under “Duration of contracts” above.
• No subsidization: how will this be defined, identified and eliminated in practice? (Address under
B
“Undertakings” above).
Avoidance of unnecessary waste • A policy in respect of waste management needs to be developed. B
in respect of the resources of the
Area
Use of sub-contractors • Authority to elaborate intentions / operationalization of this element. Parallels with land-based regimes to be B
considered.
Vessels operating in the Area • Discussions between the Authority and the International Maritime Organization to be formalized. A
Protection of submarine cables and • Discussions between the Authority and relevant representative organizations formalized. A
pipelines
Health and safety • To determine additional international / DSM-specific standards / development of best practice Emergency B
Response Plan and Procedures.
• Guidelines on the placing of floating installations and related safety zones in the Area to be developed in
conjunction with IMO.
Training • To establish areas of skills and talent shortages key to the development of the DSM industry. C
Periodic review of the • Guidelines on Procedures and Information Requirements for Review to be drafted. B/C
implementation of the plan of
work for exploitation
56

[Page 57]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Termination of sponsorship • To clarify post termination obligations for a contractor. Authority to prepare / commission a study of options C
available.
Responsibility and liability • Legal workshop / independent working group required to explore and develop further principles of A
responsibility and liability in the Area. Priority deliverable.
Protection and preservation of • This area requires the formation of targeted expert workgroups consisting of a broad range of stakeholders, A / B
the marine environment including relevant international organizations. Specific areas to be identified including RRPs for “dumping”.
Environmental management • Specific guidelines on environmental management systems to be developed together with reporting B
requirements.
Emergency orders • Secretariat to review contemporary best practice in the field of marine disaster management and responding B
to emergency situations including the lessons learnt.
• Consider working group with IMO and relevant regional organizations.
Strategic environmental • Work plan / terms of reference to be scoped for SEMPs. Regional workshops and co-operation to be A
management plan developed to formulate regional SEAs and SEMPs. Priority deliverable.
Environmental bonds and • The interaction between commercial insurance and bond mechanisms needs to be investigated together B
performance guarantees with the terms and conditions, including appropriate quantum of any bond.
Restoration and rehabilitation of • Obligation to consider as part of Environmental management plan? B
the marine environment
Adaptive management approach • Adaptive management in connection with exploitation activities in the Area requires further elaboration with A
interested parties. Priority deliverable. Offer from New Zealand government to assist development.
Seabed sustainability fund • A working paper to be drafted articulating the concept and objectives of such a fund for circulation to B
interested parties.
57

[Page 58]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Environmental liability trust fund • As above. Consider as part of “Responsibility and liability” priority deliverable? A/B
Human remains and objects and • Must be considered as part of Social impact assessment process. A/B
sites of an archaeological or
historical nature
Confidentiality of data and • Confidentiality is raised as a High-level issue. A
information & Procedures to
ensure confidentiality
Recommendations for the • The process of issuing recommendations by the Commission needs review. C
guidance of contractors
Duty to co-operate • Needs operationalizing: specific expectations / obligations? A/B
Inspection • Develop a working paper setting out a suggested structure and options, including funding, for the operation C
of an inspection regime. Independent review board?
Offences & penalties • Desktop review to be undertaken on existing / comparable regimes. B
• Interaction with sponsoring State offence and penalty regime to be understood.
Settlement of disputes • A technical working paper needs to be prepared to set out dispute resolution options under the Convention. C
Annex II Contract for exploitation
“Dealings” or arrangements • Expert input required in connection with the development of RRPs (under the Agreement) relating to unfair B
and / or uneconomic practices (in accordance with the requirements of the Agreement). See also
“Undertakings” above.
Annual Reports • Guidelines for the Preparation of Annual Reports to be drafted. C
58

[Page 59]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
Insurance • Discussions with contractors, the insurance industry and other stakeholders needed here to gain knowledge B
and understanding of insurance specifics, including limitations, exceptions and exclusions. See also
“Environmental bonds and performance guarantees” above. The German Insurance Assurance has made an
offer of help to provide input on relevant insurance aspects.
Suspension and termination of • Technical paper to clarify meaning of serious persistent and wilful violations based on existing best practice B
contract and penalties in extractive industries.
Revision • Technical paper to clarify meaning of inequitable, impracticable and impossible referenced in Annex III, B
Article 19 Convention.
High level issues
Information and data – what we • It is recommended that the Authority establish a fit-for-purpose data management strategy as a matter of A
know, what we don’t know, what priority.
we need to know
The transition between • Clarification sought over the nature of “preference and priority”. A
exploration and exploitation • Procedures to be developed on mechanism to transfer into an exclusive exploitation right.
phases
Risk assessment, evaluation and • It is recommended that the Authority gains a better understanding of the risk profile of proposed exploitation A/B
management operations through dialogue with contractors (identification of hazards and potential incident categories).
• Onus placed on contractors to collaborate here with interested stakeholders?
Confidentiality • Technical paper required to set the legal position and possible options based on best practice and trends / A
propose alternative(s) in zero draft of exploitation regulations.
Effective protection for the • Specific criteria and guidance must be developed for concepts such as “serious harm / significant adverse A/B
marine environment from change” and “vulnerable marine ecosystems”.
harmful effects • Development of a precautionary risk management framework (see Risk assessment, evaluation and
59

[Page 60]
Developing a Regulatory Framework for Mineral Exploitation in the Area
Draft regulation description Actions for operationalization of draft regulation Priority
Action (A,
B or C)
management above) together with adaptive management obligations (see below). A
• Develop EIA process in conjunction with stakeholders.
A
• Develop Strategic environmental assessments and Strategic environmental management plans (regional). A
Adaptive management • Elaborate adaptive management approach for exploitation activities in the Area. A
“Internationally recognized • Standard(s) development should, primarily, be an industry-driven initiative. Authority to engage with relevant B
standards” and their significance stakeholders to initiate a standard development process and framework.
in exploitation activities
Sponsoring State(s) and the • Authority to initiate dialogue with sponsoring States to discuss way forward. B
Authority – a clear division of • Develop a matrix setting out the division of duties and responsibilities.
duties and responsibilities?
“High-grading” of mineral • The issue of grading policy needs further consideration with interested parties, including “typical” break-even A
deposits cut-off grades and environmental policy considerations. This now speaks to a wider discussion of
“commercial viability” and the Authority’s role as a regulator.
ISA Stakeholder Consultation • ISA Communication, transparency and participation strategy – draft and circulate. A
Mining inspectorate / directorate • Need to benchmark land-based / oil and gas mining (including mining registries) / environmental regulators. B
/ environmental regulator
60