[Page 1]
ISBA/30/C/CRP.2
29 November 2024
English only
Thirties session
Council session, part I
Kingston,
17 – 28 March 2025
Elements to be relocated from the draft regulations on exploitation of
mineral resources in the Area to the Standard and Guidelines and other
rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority
Revised suspense document
Explanatory note
1. This document is a collation of the material removed from the consolidated text
(ISBA/29/C/CRP.1) and the revised consolidated text (ISBA/30/C/CRP.1) based on the discussions during
the third part of the twenty-eight session, the twenty-ninth session and the written proposals received.
2. Delegations and observers are reminded that during the negotiations of the draft regulations on
exploitation of mineral resources in the Area, many delegations have asked for highly technical elements
to be moved from the draft exploitation regulations to the relevant Standard and Guidelines and other rules,
regulations and procedures. Therefore, the text below is placed in suspense, and not discarded. The content
will inform in particular the forthcoming consideration of Standards and Guidelines.
3. The revised suspense document contains explanations and indication of where the elements
originates from in the draft exploitation regulations and where the proposals are anticipated to later be
placed. Furthermore, the reference to the original ISBA text and date is inserted in order to trace the
development of the text.
Moved from:
Regulation 2, paragraphs 3 and 6
The revised draft text of the Co-Facilitators of the Informal Working Group on Institutional Matters
(ISBA/28/C/IWG/IM/CRP.2) - Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
For the use of policy discussions and possible incorporation
The text:
3. Exploitation in the Area shall not commence until the legal framework intended for the effective
protection and preservation of the Marine Environment is adopted and scientific evidence demonstrates
that the Exploitation will be conducted in such a manner as not to cause significant and harmful changes
to the Marine Environment and its resources and to effectively protect and preserve the Marine
Environment pursuant to article 145 and [article 209 of] Part XII of UNCLOS.]
[3 Alt Exploitation shall not be authorized in the Area unless, inter alia, phase one and two Standards
and Guidelines are adopted, and effective protection of the Marine Environment from harmful effects
1

[Page 2]
can be ensured consistent with Article 145 of the Convention [and including biological diversity and
ecosystem integrity] [and effective protection of human life in accordance with Article 146 of the
Convention].
[3 Alt 2. Exploitation in the Area shall not commence until:
(a) the legal framework intended for the effective protection and preservation of the Marine Environment
has entered into force [and the Authority has adopted an environmental policy];
(b) the implementation of [Target 3 of] the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework is well
on track in the area beyond national jurisdiction; and
(c) scientific evidence demonstrates that Exploitation will be conducted in such a manner so as: not to
cause significant and harmful changes to the Marine Environment and its resources, [pursuant to article
196 of , and] to effectively protect and preserve the Marine Environment[, including biological diversity
and ecosystem integrity] pursuant to Article 145 and Part XII of the Convention [including biological
diversity and ecosystem integrity], and not to impede the full implementation of [Target 3 of] the
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework in the area beyond national jurisdiction.
[…]
[6. Members of the Authority, Sponsoring States, Contractors, and the Authority shall use best
endeavours in their actions to uphold public trust in and regulatory integrity [of the Authority], and shall
not engage on decisions in which they have a conflict of interest.]
Moved from:
Regulation 17, para 7(d)
The revised draft text of the President (ISBA/28/C/WOW/CRP.2) – Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
Material change to a work plan provision
The text:
(d) In order to progress from Exploration to Exploitation of a site within the Contract Area, where such
Exploitation activity was not covered by the agreed Plan of Work, the Contractor must submit a new
environmental impact statement and revised Plan of Work, in accordance with regulation 46.bis and
which must be approved by the Authority in accordance with Regulations 12 to 16.
Moved from:
Regulation 20 (6) (b) bis
The consolidated text (ISBA/29/C/CRP.1) – Moved in November 2024.
To be placed:
To be decided.
The text:
2

[Page 3]
(b) bis. The cumulative environmental impact does not exceed the thresholds set by the applicable
Regional Environmental Management Plan as a result of the renewal, and that such renewal does not
hinder the achievement of the strategic and regional environmental goals and objectives;
Moved from:
Regulation 21 (2) (a) and (b)
The consolidated text (ISBA/29/C/CRP.1) – Moved in November 2024.
To be placed:
Suggested deleted
The text:
(a) Termination due to a Contractor’s material non-compliance under its terms of sponsorship:
termination to takes effect [no earlier] [no later than] [6] months after the date of receipt of the
notification by the Secretary-General; [or]
(b) Termination due to reasons other than those listed in paragraph (a) above: termination to takes effect
no [earlier] [later] than 12 months after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
Moved from:
Regulation 25 (2)
The consolidated text (ISBA/29/C/CRP.1) – Moved in November 2024.
To be placed:
Suggested deleted as the para has been replaced with the alternative version. Paras 3-5 are suggested
deleted.
The text:
2. Where, as part of a revised Plan of Work, the Contractor delivers a revised Environmental Impact
Statement, Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan under paragraph 1 above,
regulation 57 (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis to such Environmental Plans [if the modification to the
Environmental Plans constitutes a Material Change], and such Environmental Plans shall be dealt with
in accordance with the procedure set out in regulation 11.
3. Provided that, where applicable, the procedure under regulation 93bis] has been completed, the
Commission shall, at its next meeting, provided that the documentation has been circulated at least 30
Days before the meeting, examine and assess the Feasibility Study and any revised Plan of Work
supplied by the Contractor under paragraph 1 above, and in the light of any [submissions received under
regulation 93bis] on the Environmental Plans.
4. If the Commission determines that the revised Plan of Work, including any amendments thereto dealt
with in accordance with regulation 57, continues to meet the requirements of regulations 12 and 13, it
shall recommend to the Council the approval of the revised Plan of Work. [If the Commission determines
that it does not meet said requirements, the procedure established in Regulation 14 (b) will be applied.]
5. The Council shall consider the report and recommendation of the Commission relating to the approval
of the revised Plan of Work in accordance with paragraph 11 of section 3 of the annex to the Agreement.
3

[Page 4]
Moved from:
Regulation 26, paragraph 3bis
The revised draft text of the President (ISBA/28/C/WOW/CRP.2) – Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
EPG Standard and Guidelines
The text:
3 bis. The Environmental Performance Bond shall take the form of a letter of credit or surety bond
guaranteed by a financial institution with a long-term credit rating of AA or better from Fitch Ratings,
Moody’s or Standard & Poor and meeting the other financial criteria provided for in the Standard.
Moved from:
Regulation 29, para 2, second sentence and para 3-4.
The revised draft text of the President (ISBA/28/C/WOW/CRP.2) – Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
In relevant annex or standard and guidelines.
The text:
If business practices are suspended due to global economic conditions or force majeure,
the Contractor shall be allowed to maintain a longer suspension. The Commission shall [in
consultation with the Economic Planning Commission], upon determining that the reasons
for the reduction or suspension are reasonable, including where the prevailing economic
conditions make Commercial Production impracticable, [of for other circumstances
beyond the Contractor’s control] recommend approval of the suspension to the Council.
The Council shall, based on the recommendation of the Commission, decide on the
reduction or suspension requested by the Contractor. The Contractor may apply for more
than one suspension. [During the period when the Contractor reduces or suspends
production, the annual fixed fee or royalties paid by the Contractor shall be exempted or
deducted appropriately].
3. In the event of any suspension in mining activities, the Contractor shall continue
to monitor and manage the Mining Area in accordance with the Closure Plan. Where
suspension continues for a period of more than 12 months, the Commission may require
the Contractor to submit a final Closure Plan in accordance with regulation 60.] Where the
Contractor elects to suspend all production for more than five consecutive years, the
Council may [suspend] [terminate] the exploitation contract following consultation with
the Contractor, and the Contractor [may] [shall] be required to implement the final Closure
Plan.
4. A Contractor shall notify the Secretary-General as soon as it recommences any
mining activities, and no later than 72 hours after such recommencement, and, where
necessary, shall provide to the Secretary-General such non-market information as is
necessary to demonstrate that the issue triggering a reduction or suspension has been
addressed. The Secretary-General shall notify the Council that production has
recommenced.
4

[Page 5]
Moved from:
Regulation 29 Alt.
The revised draft text of the President (ISBA/28/C/WOW/CRP.2) – Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
Relevant Guidelines
The text:
Reduction or suspension in production due to market conditions
1. In pursuance of Regulation 2(2)(a) relating to the efficient conduct of activities, and the avoidance of
unnecessary waste, and to ensure that the resources are being mined optimally in accordance with the
Mining Work Plan, a Contractor shall, in accordance with Best Industry Practices:
(a) Avoid inefficient mining practices;
(b) Minimize the generation of waste in the conduct of exploitation in the Area
2. A Contractor shall include in its annual report under Regulation 40 such information and Reports as
the Secretary General requests, in accordance with the Standards and Guidelines, to demonstrate that
the Contractor is meeting the obligations in paragraph 1 above.
3. If the Secretary General becomes aware that Contractor is not meeting the obligations in paragraph 1
above, by way of written notice to the Contractor, request a review of mining and processing activities
carried out under the Plan of Work. The Contractor shall implement any modifications to bring the
Mining Workplan and any mining and processing practice into conformity with Best Industry Practices.
4. Members of the Authority shall, to the best of their abilities, assist the Secretary General through the
provision of Data and information in connection with this regulation where processing, treatment and
refining of ore from seabed mining occur under their jurisdiction and/or control.
Moved from:
Regulation 44 ter
The consolidated text (ISBA/29/C/CRP.1) – Moved in November 2024.
To be placed:
General policy
The text:
Environmental Goals and Objectives
1. In performing their roles and obligations under the Convention, the Agreement, and all
relevant rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, Contractors, the Enterprise, the
Authority and its organs, and Sponsoring States shall be guided by the Strategic Environmental
Goals and Objectives, set out in paragraphs 6 and 7.
5

[Page 6]
2. The Council shall ensure that the Strategic Environmental Goals and Objectives pursuant
to paragraphs 6 and 7 are operationalized through regionally and Mineral specific environmental
objectives [including] in Regional Environmental Management Plans.
3. The Council shall ensure that the Strategic Environmental Goals and Objectives pursuant
to paragraphs 6 and 7 and the regionally and Mineral specific environmental objectives [in Regional
Environmental Management Plans] pursuant to paragraph 2 are further operationalised through
environmental thresholds, developed pursuant to Regulations 45(2) and 94, prior to the assessment
of the first application for a Plan of Work for exploitation.
4, Contractors, applicants, the Council and the Commission shall ensure that a proposed Plan
of Work reflects and contributes to the achievement of the Authority's [Strategic] Environmental
Goals and Objectives, [including those] pursuant to paragraphs 6 and 7 as well as the relevant
regionally and Mineral specific environmental objectives pursuant to paragraph 2.
5. The Authority shall keep its Strategic Environmental Goals and Objectives under periodic
review and ensure amendments to reflect advances in scientific research and knowledge. Where the
Authority’s Environmental [Goals and] Objectives are revised, the Commission shall:
(a) inform Contractors and Sponsoring States and discuss whether any modification of a Plan of
Work is required pursuant to Regulation 57; and
(b) recommend to the Council any necessary amendments to other relevant instruments, including
Standards, Guidelines, and Regional Environmental Management Plans.
6. The strategic Environmental Goals are to sustain [and contribute to restoring] marine
(benthic and pelagic) ecosystem integrity, including the physical, chemical, geological and
biological environment, [and contributing to restoring ecosystem integrity].
7. The Authority’s strategic Environmental Objectives are to:
(a) Prevent [non-negligible] loss of [biodiversity, including] genetic diversity, species richness,
habitat or community types, and structural complexity;
(b) Maintain the ability of populations to replace themselves, including ensuring population
connectivity and the preservation of suitable habitat;
(c) Prevent significant changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of species [of flora
and fauna];
(d) Prevent further jeopardy to endangered or threatened species or populations of said species;
(e) [Prevent the degradation] [Sustain] of ecosystem functions (e.g. the long-term natural
productivity of habitats, elemental cycling, trophic relationships);
(f) Prevent non-negligible risks of Contamination by pollutants, damage to [flora and
fauna]/[species], or other harmful effects to ecosystem integrity during any phase of the mining
process;
(g) Prevent significant changes in the atmosphere, climate and weather patterns, the terrestrial
environment, or the Marine Environment;
(j) Prevent significant adverse effect on air and water quality;
(h) Maintain resilience to prevent regime shift, and to support recovery from cumulative impacts,
including mining, that can affect source populations and communities, connectivity corridors, life-
history patterns and species distributions;
(i) Sustain ecosystem services, including carbon sequestration, recognizing that many are yet to be
discovered;
(k) Prevent non-negligible risks that will undermine the protection and conservation of the natural
resources of the Area and the prevention of damage to the [flora and fauna]/[species] of the Marine
Environment;
(l) Prevent degradation, or risk of degradation to special biological, scientific, archaeological, or
historical significance of the Area or the Marine Environment. This shall include the preservation
o f vulnerable and unique marine ecosystems.]
Moved from:
Regulation 47 Alt:
- One sentence in para 3 (a),
- Point (i)-(iii) of para 4 (b), and
- Point (i)-(v) of para 4 (f)
6

[Page 7]
The fourth revised draft text of the Facilitator of the Informal Working Group on the Protection and
Preservation of the Marine Environment (ISBA/28/C/IWG/ENV/CRP.3/Rev.1) – Moved in February
2024.
To be placed:
Relevant Standard
The text:
One sentence in para 3 (a):
The EIA shall be based on relevant environmental baseline data: “that captures temporal, (seasonal and
interannual) and spatial variation”
Point (i)-(iii) of para 4 (b):
A stage for assessment of environmental impacts in accordance with Regulations 47bis, including:
“[(i) An update to the environmental risk assessment, as developed during
scoping, describing the likely impacts on the marine environment and [objects of an
archaeological historical nature] and predict the nature and extent of the [Environmental
Impacts and] Environmental Effects [and risks] of the Exploitation including residual
impacts, cumulative [effects], including existing and foreseen mining operations, other
activities and natural phenomena.
(ii) An evaluation of harmful effects on the [marine] environment and
ecosystem services, [based] on [a scientific-based approach, including] clear and
transparent assessment criteria and a robust evidence base, [applying] Best Available
Scientific Information and where applicable, relevant traditional knowledge of Indigenous
Peoples and local communities];
(iii) The presentation and evaluation of potential mitigation measures, and
subsequent statement of management and monitoring commitments ([ to inform
preparation of the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan), to [monitor]
mitigate, [manage], avoid and minimize [harmful] effects [to the marine environment],
and monitor residual impacts;]”
Point (i)-(v) of para 4 (f)
(f) A proactive consultation by an applicant or Contractor with Stakeholders at all stages,
in accordance with the applicable Standards and taking into account the applicable
Guidelines, which includes:
“[(i) Providing Stakeholders with access to up-to-date and comprehensive
[environmental data and] information [relating to] the proposed activities [their ]
impacts,
(ii) Using best efforts to obtain Stakeholder comments on the draft scoping
report and draft environmental impact statement for a reasonable period.
(iii) Provide a reasonable opportunity for Stakeholders to raise enquiries and
to make known their views,
(iv) Make publicly available Stakeholder comments received during the
consultation process, including on the applicant or Contractor’s own website, and
(v) Record and address, in the scoping report and Environmental Impact
Statement respectively, any substantive and relevant Stakeholder comments received.]”
7

[Page 8]
Moved from:
Regulation 48
The consolidated text (ISBA/29/C/CRP.1) – Moved in November 2024.
To be placed:
Relevant Standard
The text:
48(4)(i bis): “(…) including the implications of those uncertainties for the Environmental
Impact Assessment and its findings (…)”.
Moved from:
DR 54, para 2, litras a-h
The fourth revised draft text of the Facilitator of the Informal Working Group on the Protection and
Preservation of the Marine Environment (ISBA/28/C/IWG/ENV/CRP.3/Rev.1) – Moved in February
2024.
To be placed:
Relevant standard on the Environmental Compensation Fund
The text:
Those rules and procedures shall include, inter alia:
(a) A mechanism for financing the funds in accordance with Regulation 56, including replenishment
upon disbursement;
(b) A description of how the funds and any interest generated will be managed and by whom;
(c) The process for accessing the funds;
(d) The type of damages and purposes eligible for claims against the funds in accordance with regulation
55;
(e) The standard of proof required for claims against the funds;
(f) A policy on refunds of Contractor payments into the funds;
(g) A process for determining disbursements or refunds from the funds; and
(h) The promotion of the participation of affected persons or other Stakeholders in decisions about
disbursement of funds.
Moved from:
Regulation 64 bis to Regulation 64 qui
The third revised draft text of the Chair of the Open Ended Working Group on the Financial Terms of a
Contract (ISBA/28/C/OEWG/CRP.6) – Moved in February 2024
To be placed:
8

[Page 9]
Relevant standard (revised in accordance with the revised proposal submitted by Australia on behalf of
the Intersessional Working Group on an Equalization Measure)
The text:
Option 1: Hybrid Equalization Measure
I Determination of the applicable equalization measure
1. If a Contractor’s most recent Equalization Measure Audit confirms that:
(a) the Contractor does not have any Tax Exemptions from its Sponsoring State(s); and
(b) the Contractor does not receive any Subsidies from its Sponsoring State(s),
then the Contractor shall pay the Top-up Profit Share Payment to the Authority.
2. If a Contractor’s most recent Equalization Measure Audit confirms that:
(a) the Contractor does have Tax Exemptions from its Sponsoring State(s); and/or
(b) the Contractor does receive Subsidies from its Sponsoring State(s),
then the Contractor shall pay the Additional Royalty to the Authority.
3. A Contractor shall ensure that an Equalization Measure Audit shall be carried out prior to the
commencement of Commercial Production and periodically thereafter as determined by the Authority
in accordance with a further relevant Standard and applicable Guidelines. Promptly on its completion a
Contractor shall forward a copy of the Equalization Measure Audit to the [Secretary-General]
[Commission]..
4. A Contractor shall pay for each Equalization Measure Audit, which shall be undertaken by an
Independent Auditor in accordance with the relevant Standard and applicable Guidelines.
5. A Contractor and Sponsoring State(s) shall fully assist an Independent Auditor undertaking an
Equalization Measure Audit and shall provide the Independent Auditor with all relevant documentation,
including but not limited to the Contractor’s audited accounts, any sponsorship agreement or other
arrangements between the Contractor or any of its Related Entities and the Sponsoring State(s) or any
other government authority in any jurisdiction, any contract, and any other documents that evidence or
provide the Contractor with an actual or potential Tax Exemption or Subsidy.
6. If a Contractor or any of its Related Entities, at any time after the initial Equalization Measure Audit
has been completed, enters into, or otherwise agrees, or receives the benefit of, any arrangement that
could be considered to provide the Contractor with an actual or potential Tax Exemption or Subsidy, the
Contractor shall immediately notify the [Secretary-General] [Commission]. The [Commission] may, in
accordance with the relevant Standard and applicable Guidelines, determine that an Equalization
Measure Audit must be carried out.
II Additional Royalty
1. The Additional Royalty payable under this Equalization Measure is in addition to the royalty provided
for in Regulation 64.
2. If required under Standard I of this Standard, a Contractor, from the [commencement of the Second
Period of Commercial Production] [fifth anniversary of the date of commencement of Commercial
Production], a Contractor shall pay an Additional Royalty in respect of mineral-bearing ore sold or
removed without sale from the Contract Area as provided for in Appendix IV to these regulations.
3. The Applicable Additional Royalty Rate shall be [8%].
4. The Additional Royalty payable to the Authority for each [royalty return period] [Calendar Year] shall
be equal to X minus Y, where:
(a) X is the product of the Applicable Additional Royalty Rate multiplied by the Aggregate Relevant
Metal Value for that [royalty return period] [Calendar Year]; and
(b) Y is any amount of Allowable Sponsoring State Payments that have not been deducted in previous
[royalty return periods][Calendar Years] when calculating an Additional Royalty payment or a Top-up
Profit Share Payment, calculated in accordance with a further Standard and taking into account the
Guidelines.
9

[Page 10]
In no circumstances shall the Additional Royalty be less than zero.
5. A payment from a Contractor to the Sponsoring State(s) is an Allowable Sponsoring State Payment
where:
(a) it is an actual cash payment by the Contractor to its Sponsoring State(s) for payment of a compulsory
fiscal imposition levied on the Contractor by its Sponsoring Sstate(s) on the income, profits or
production from seabed mining activities under the exploitation contract. [Payments of dividends,
distributions or similar by Contractors to their Sponsoring State(s) due to the Sponsoring State(s) holding
equity in the Contractor are not an Allowable Sponsoring State Payment];
(b) there is a [signed letter] [receipt] from the Sponsoring State’s tax authority stating the actual cash
amount paid by the Contractor to the Sponsoring State for payments of a compulsory fiscal imposition(s)
due to seabed mining activities under the exploitation contract; and
(c) there is a signed letter from an Independent Auditor confirming the actual cash amount paid by the
Contractor to the Sponsoring State for payment of a compulsory fiscal imposition(s) due to seabed
mining activities under the exploitation contract.
6. The Contractor shall pay for the audit referred to in Standard II.5.c
7. Draft Regulations 27, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82 and 89 shall
apply to the Additional Royalty as they apply to the royalty.
8. Appendix IV definitions apply to the Additional Royalty as they apply to the royalty.
9. Draft Standards 1 to 4 apply to the Additional Royalty as they apply to the royalty.
III Top-up Profit Share Payment
1. If required under Standard I, a Contractor, from the [commencement of the Second Period of
Commercial Production] [fifth anniversary of the date of commencement of Commercial Production],
shall pay a Top-up Profit Share Payment.
2. The Top-up Profit Share Payment Rate shall be 25%.
3. The Top-up Profit Share Payment payable to the Authority for each [royalty return period] [Calendar
Year] shall be equal to A minus B, where:
(a) A is the Top-up Profit Share Payment Rate multiplied by Profits for that [royalty return period]
[Calendar Year];
and
(b) B is the Total Eligible Payments for that year, calculated in accordance with the Standard and taking
into account the Guidelines.
In no circumstances shall the Top-up Profit Share Payment be less than zero.
4. Profits for the [royalty return period] [Calendar Year] are equal to C plus D plus E (without double
counting) where:
(a) C is the sum of the Income for that [royalty return period] [Calendar Year] from Relevant Activities
from all Related Entities that have not met the Inclusion Criteria;
(b) D is the sum of the Income for that [royalty return period] [Calendar Year] from all activities from
all Related Entities that have met the Inclusion Criteria; and
(c) E is the Income of the Contractor for that [royalty return period] [Calendar Year].
5. Total Eligible Payments for a [royalty return period] [Calendar Year] are equal to Eligible Royalty
Payments to the Sponsoring State(s) for that [royalty return period] [Calendar Year] plus Other Eligible
Payments for that [royalty return period] [Calendar Year].
6. Eligible Royalty Payments are royalties payable to the Sponsoring State(s) by the Contractor due to
seabed mining activities under the exploitation contract.
7. Other Eligible Payments are equal to F plus G, where:
10

[Page 11]
(a) F is the sum of Covered Taxes [incurred][paid] by all Related Entities to the Sponsoring State(s) or
any other government authority in any jurisdiction arising due to Income that has been included in the
calculation of Profits provided for by Standard III.4 for that [royalty return period] [Calendar Year].
Any payment made to any Sponsoring State(s) or any other government authority due to Income not
included in the definition of Profits in Standard III.4 is not an Other Eligible Payment;
and
(b) G is Covered Taxes [incurred][paid] by the Contractor to the Sponsoring State(s) [or any other
government authority in any jurisdiction] for that [royalty return period] [Calendar Year].
8. A Contractor shall lodge with the Secretary-General a Top-up Profit Share Return not later than 90
Days after the end of each [royalty return period] [Calendar Year].
9. A Top-up Profit Share Return shall include the following information for each [royalty return period]
[Calendar Year], in accordance with a further Standard and taking into account the Guidelines:
(a) the Top-up Profit Share Payment due, Profits, Income, Income included in Profits, Total Eligible
Payments, Eligible Royalty Payments, and Other Eligible Payments for that [royalty return period]
[Calendar Year];
(b) for each Related Entity, whether it meets the Inclusion Criteria;
(c) for each Related Entity that meets the Inclusion Criteria, its Income, Total Eligible Payments, and
Other Eligible Payments;
(d) for each Related Entity that does not meet the Inclusion Criteria, its Income from Relevant Activities,
Total Eligible Payments, and Other Eligible Payments, and Covered Taxes;
(e) audited accounts for the Contractor and its Related Entities;
(f) for each Related Entity that does not meet the Inclusion Criteria, audited segmented accounts for
each of those Related Entities showing the Income, Total Eligible Tax Payments and Other Eligible
Payments and Covered Taxes from Relevant Activities and separately from non-Relevant Activities;
and
(g) any other information, document or anything required under the Standards, Guidelines or reasonably
requested by the Authority for the administration and validation of the Top-Up Profit Share Payment.
10. A Profit Share Audit shall be carried out by an Independent Auditor [employed by and reporting to
the Authority and] in accordance with the relevant Standard and applicable Guidelines.
11. A Contractor shall pay for each Profit Share Audit.
IV Requirement for a Further Standard for Financial Payments
1. The Authority shall adopt Standards [and Guidelines] providing for the effective operation of the
Additional Royalty and Top-up Profit Share Payment, including but not limited to:
(a) definitions of Inclusion Criteria, Subsidies, Relevant Activities, and Tax Exemptions;
(b) definitions of Related Entities, Income and Covered Taxes that will be based to the greatest extent
practicable on the OECD Pillar 2 Global Anti-Base Erosion Model Rules, or alternatively, may directly
reference the relevant articles of the Pillar 2 Global Anti-Base Erosion Model Rules (as amended or
updated from time to time);
(c) the criteria an auditor must meet to be an Independent Auditor;
(d) the criteria for the Equalization Measure Audit and Profit Share Independent Audit;
(e) the fees for the Equalization Measure Audit and Profit Share Audit;
(f) the format and required content of the Top-up Profit Share Return;
(g) the penalties, fees, and interest that the Authority shall levy on a Contractor due to non-cooperation
with an Independent Auditor, late submission of a Top-up Profit Share Return, failure to submit a Topup
Profit Share Return, submission of an incomplete Top-up Profit Share Return, late payment of the Top-
11

[Page 12]
up Profit Share Payment and non-payment of a Top-up Profit Share Payment; and any other provisions
as required.
Option 2: Additional Profit Share Equalization Measure
I Additional Profit Share Imposed
1. A Contractor shall pay an Additional Profit Share to the Authority each year.
2. The Additional Profit Share shall be calculated and paid separately for each Exploitation Contract.
3. The Contractor when calculating the Additional Profit Share shall not transfer Accumulated Profits,
Covered Payments, Revenue or Allowable Costs between Exploitation Contracts.
4. The Additional Profit Share for a year is equal to A minus B, when A minus B is a positive number,
and is equal to zero when A minus B is zero or a negative number, where:
A is 25% of the Accumulated Profits for that year; and
B is any Covered Payments that have not previously been credited against the Additional Profit Share.
5. The Additional Profit Share shall be imposed in addition to any other royalty or charge owed by the
Contractor to the Authority.
II Accumulated Profits
1. Accumulated Profits for a year shall be equal to X minus Y plus Z, where:
X is Revenue for that year;
Y is Allowable Costs for that year; and
Z is equal to zero if Accumulated Profits in the previous year were a positive number or zero, and Z is
equal to Accumulated Profits in the previous year multiplied by 1.10 if Accumulated Profits in the
previous year were a negative number.
III Revenue
1. The Revenue of a Contractor for a year shall include:
(a) any amount received by the Contractor for polymetallic nodules removed from the Exploitation Area;
(b) any amount received by the Contractor for any Resource removed from the Exploitation Area;
(c) any amount received by the Contractor under a policy of insurance, indemnity or any other financial
instrument due to the loss or destruction of polymetallic nodules, loss or destruction of any
Resource, loss or destruction of any item the cost of which was an Allowable Cost, or loss of income
that would have been Revenue if the loss had not occurred;
(d) any amount received from the sale of data or information gathered under the Exploitation License
or Exploration License; and
(e) any amount received from a decommissioning fund, environmental compensation fund or similar
provided that the payment by the Contractor to the fund was an Allowable Cost.
IV Allowable Cost
1. Allowable Costs for a year include the cost of:
(a) the acquisition, repair and maintenance of equipment to undertake mining in the Exploitation Area;
(b) labour on vessels in the Exploitation Area that are required for mining in the Exploitation Area;
(c) fuel, haulage and supplies for vessels in the Exploitation Area that are required for mining in the
Exploitation Area;
(d) labour, fuel, haulage and supplies for vessels required for transporting polymetallic nodules of other
resources from the Exploitation Area to the first port of call;
12

[Page 13]
(e) the general administration and management, including rent of land and building, essential to, and
directly connected to, mining activities in the Exploitation Area and accruing in the Sponsoring State;
(f) royalty and fee payments by the Contractor under the Exploitation Contract to the Authority;
(g) exploration expenditures that:
(i) were made under the Exploration Contract that the Exploitation Contract Area was
previously subject to; and
(ii) were made prior to the signing of the Exploitation Contract
are an Allowable Cost in the first year of the Exploitation Contract only;
(h) if the Exploitation Contract Area is extended, exploration expenditures that:
(i) were made under the Exploration Contract that the extended portion of the Exploitation
Contract Area was previously subject to; and
(ii) were made after the signing of the Exploitation Contract and prior to the extension of the
Exploitation Contract Area
(i) are an Allowable Cost in the year that the Exploitation Contract was extended; and
(j) any payment made to a decommissioning fund, environmental compensation fund or similar that is
operated by the Authority and that is required as a condition of the Exploitation Contract.
2. Allowable Costs for a year shall not include:
(a) any general administration and management costs, including rent and buildings, accruing outside of
the sponsoring State;
(b) any cost related to the importation or processing of polymetallic nodules or other resources outside
of the Exploitation Contract area;
(c) any costs related to the transportation of polymetallic nodules or other resources outside of the
Exploitation Contract Area aside from the labour, fuel, haulage and supplies for vessels required for
transporting polymetallic nodules or other resources from the Exploitation Area to the first port of call;
(d) any capital withdrawn, or sum employed or intended to be employed as capital;
(e) any interest on loans or payment on any financial instrument that has similar characteristics to a loan;
and
(f) any other cost not provided for in Standard IV.1.
3. The Allowable Costs provided for in Standard IV.1 (e) [administrative costs] shall be limited to 3%
of total Allowable Costs over the term of the Exploitation Contract.
V Arm’s Length Transaction
1. In the event that an Allowable Cost or Revenue accrued through an Arm’s Length Transaction, then
the amount used to calculate the Additional Profit Share shall be the amount from that transaction;
2. In the event that an Allowable Cost or Revenue accrued through a transaction that was not an Arm’s
Length transaction then the Contractor shall, for the purposes of calculating the Additional Profit Share,
report the value of the transaction as the value that would have accrued if the transaction had been an
Arm’s Length transaction; and
3. In the event that the Authority considers that the Contractor has reported Revenue at a lower value
than that which would have accrued in an Arm’s Length transaction, or reported an Allowable Cost at a
value which is higher than that which would have accrued in an Arm’s Length Transaction, then the
Authority may, for the purposes of calculating the Additional Profits Share, amend the value of Revenue
13

[Page 14]
and/or Allowable Costs to an amount equal to that which would have accrued through an Arm’s Length
transaction.
VI Covered Payments
1. A Covered Payment is:
(a) an actual cash payment by the Contractor to its Sponsoring State(s) for payment of a compulsory
fiscal imposition levied on the Contractor by its Sponsoring state(s) on the income, profits or production
from seabed mining activities under the exploitation contract. Payments of dividends, distributions or
similar by Contractors to their Sponsoring State(s) due to the Sponsoring State(s) holding equity in the
Contractor are not a Covered Payment.
(b) where there is a signed letter from the sponsoring State’s tax authority stating the actual cash amount
paid by the Contractor to the sponsoring State for payment of a compulsory fiscal imposition(s) s relating
to income, profits or production under the Exploitation Contract; and
(c) where there is a signed letter from an International Accounting Firm confirming the actual cash
amount paid by the Contractor to the sponsoring State for payment of a compulsory fiscal impositions
relating to income, profits or production under the Exploitation Contract.
VII Additional Profit Share Return
1. The Contractor shall provide an Additional Profit Share Return to the Authority within 90 days of the
end of the year.
2. The Additional Profit Share Return shall include, inter alia, the Amount of the Additional Profit Share,
Covered Payments, Revenues and Allowable Costs and further details as provided for by the Additional
Profit Share Standards.
VIII Payment of Additional Profit Share
1. The Additional Profit Share shall be paid on the date the Additional Profit Share Return is lodged.
2. The Additional Profit Share shall be paid in USD or any other freely convertible currency, save that
the Contractor shall only make payment in one currency over the term of the Exploitation Contract.
3. All payments shall be paid gross and shall be free of any deductions, transaction fees or other charges.
IX Applicability of Other Regulations to the Additional Profit Share
1. The following provisions shall apply to the Additional Profit Share as they do to the Royalty:
(a) Regulation 77 Anti-avoidance rule; and
(b) Regulation 78 Arm’s Length Adjustments.
[If Member States are happy with the provisions for Arm’s Length Adjustments provided for by
Regulation 78 then it may be possible to delete Standard V. In addition, it may be possible to link the
profit share to other existing provisions concerning the royalty and to reduce the scope of the Standards
provided for in the next paragraph].
X Requirement for Further Standards
1. The Authority shall publish Standards providing for:
(a) any further information required by Contractors to calculate the Additional Profit Share;
(b) further details on the format and information to be included in the Additional Profit Share Return;
(c) the rights of the Authority to audit the Additional Profit Share Return;
(d) requirements for contractors to keep records and books of account;
(e) penalties for any offences relating to the Additional Profit Share;
(f) the standards and criteria accounting firms must meet to be considered International Accounting
Firms; and
(g) any further provisions required for the effective functioning of the Additional Profit Share.
14

[Page 15]
Moved from:
Regulation 96 bis.
The third revised draft text of the Facilitator of the Informal Working Group on Inspection, Compliance
and Enforcement (ISBA/28/C/IWG/ICE/CRP.2) – Moved in October 2023.
To be placed:
In the Rules of Procedure (ROP)
The text:
Decisions of the Compliance Committee shall be taken by consensus. If all efforts to achieve consensus
has been exhausted, or time is of the essence, decisions may be taken by a majority of members present
and voting. In the case of a tie, the Chair of the Compliance Committee shall have the decisive vote.
The Compliance Committee shall meet at regular intervals using virtual means, and in urgent cases
involving possible instances of non-compliance, shall convene on short notice. Members of the
Compliance Committee shall rotate among themselves on a monthly basis in order to ensure that one
member is always available “on call” in cases of non-compliance that require urgent action. In addition,
the Compliance Committee shall appoint its own chair and vice chair. Unless otherwise determined by
the Compliance Committee, the Chair of the Commission, the Chief Inspector and a member of the
Secretariat designated by the Secretary-General shall be invited to attend the meetings of the Compliance
Committee but without the right to vote. The Secretary-General shall facilitate the meetings of the
Compliance Committee.
Moved from:
DR 97, para 2
The third revised draft text of the Facilitator of the Informal Working Group on Inspection, Compliance
and Enforcement (ISBA/28/C/IWG/ICE/CRP.2) – Moved in October 2023.
To be placed:
Inspector Code of Conduct
The text:
Actions of the Inspectors are specifically guided by the rules and obligations contained within the Code
of Conduct. Below to be inserted as examples/principles the inspectors shall be guided by.
The inspectors shall be guided by transparency, accountability, probity, professionalism and non-
discrimination.
Moved from:
DR 101 bis
15

[Page 16]
The fourth revised draft text of the Facilitator of the Informal Working Group on Inspection, Compliance
and Enforcement (ISBA/28/C/IWG/ICE/CRP.3) – Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
General whistleblowing policy of the Authority
The text:
Whistle-blowing procedures
1. The [Compliance Committee] [Assembly, in collaboration with the Council] shall develop and
implement:
(a) whistle-blowing policy for the staff of the Authority, the Inspectorate, the Enterprise, and personnel
of Contractors, and
(b) a public complaints procedure to facilitate reporting to the Authority by any person of any concerns
about the activities of a Contractor, or the Authority.
(2) The whistle-blowing and complaints procedures under this Regulation must:
(a) be publicly advertised,
(b) be easy to access and navigate,
(c) enable anonymous reporting,
(d) trigger investigations of reports by independent persons, and
(e) be proactively communicated by the Secretary-General to Contractors and their staff, and other
Stakeholders.
3. A Contractor, [its subcontractors and their agents] shall have in operation whistle-blowing and
complaints procedures relating its activities as well as those of its subcontractors and agents, which must
be publicly advertised, and which should include details of the Authority’s equivalent procedures to
enable direct reporting to the Authority by a complainant where preferable.
Moved from:
DR 102
Moved in November 2024.
To be placed:
Rules of Procedure on inspection, compliance and enforcement
The text:
5. The Committee shall meet at regular intervals preferably using virtual means, and in urgent cases
involving possible instances of non-compliance, shall convene virtually and on short notice. Members of
the Committee shall rotate among themselves on a monthly basis in order to ensure that one member is
always available “on call” in cases of non-compliance that require urgent action. In addition, the
Committee shall appoint its own chair and vice chair. Unless otherwise determined by the Committee, the
Chair of the Commission, the Chief Inspector and a member of the Secretariat designated by the Secretary-
General shall be invited to attend the meetings of the Committee but without the right to vote. The
Secretary-General shall facilitate the meetings of the Committee.
16

[Page 17]
Moved from:
Annex IV of the Regulations
The fourth revised draft text of the Facilitator of the Informal Working Group on the Protection and
Preservation of the Marine Environment (ISBA/28/C/IWG/ENV/CRP.3/Rev.1) – Moved in February
2024.
To be placed:
Relevant Standard and Guideline
According to the informal drafting group on restructuring the Environmental Impact Assessment Process,
a majority of Annex IV should be moved to either Standard or Guidelines. This is laid out in Annex IV of
the informal working groups report and https://www.isa.org.jm/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/Joint-text-
proposal-EIA-EIS-restructure-July-2024.pdf.
In respect of the subdivision between standards and guidelines, please see the suggestions by the drafting
group: https://www.isa.org.jm/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/Joint-text-proposal-EIA-EIS-restructure-
July-2024.pdf
The text:
Executive summary: Information provided in the executive summary should include:
(a) A description of the proposed project, its objectives, if any, a description of alternatives analysed,
and a justification of the alternative chosen;
(a) bis. A description of alternatives analysed;
(b) Anticipated Economic, financial and other benefits to be derived from the project, and the
beneficiaries for each, [including humankind];
(c) A description of anticipated and cumulative, risks and impacts of the activity, as assessed by experts,
(including, but not limited to, oceanographic, geological, biological, socioeconomic and sociocultural)
including the expected spatial extent and duration of impacts and cumulative impacts in relation to the
identified baselines, and the expected recovery rates of the system [to its original state]; [suggested
deleted]
(d) Measures to minimize and Mitigate anticipated and Cumulative Environmental Impacts, support
recovery of the Marine Environment from impacts,] and a description of any anticipated and cumulative
residual impacts, that may occur despite Mitigation, noting how the Mitigation hierarchy is being
employed in assessing impacts;
(d bis) A description of any residual impacts;
(d ter) Expected recovery rate of the Marine Environment impacted;
(e) Linkages with development of the Environmental Monitoring and Management Plan and the Closure
Plan; and
(f) Consultation undertaken with other parties and Stakeholders.
Section 1
1.1. Background
Summarize briefly the project being proposed, including all main activities and locations.
17

[Page 18]
1.2. Project viability
Provide information on the viability of the proposed development, its economic context and why the
project is needed.
Provide understanding of the policy on alternatives being followed by the applicant. The determination
of project viability may include a summary of feasibility investigations related to geophysical,
engineering, geotechnical, oceanographic, biological and other components of project operations.
1.3. Project history
Summarize briefly the work undertaken up to the date the Environmental Impact Statement was finalized
and ready to be submitted to the Authority. This should include a brief description of the resource
discovery, the Exploration undertaken, depth zones, and any component/ system testing conducted to
date. The time, location, and parties involved in Exploration work should be included. For the
component/ system testing, provide a brief description of activities here. If applicable, include any
report(s) related to results of component/system testing and Test Mining studies including any
monitoring and assessment of the Environmental Impacts in an appendix.
1.4. Project proponent
Summarize the credentials of the proponent, including major shareholders, other contracts or licences
held (including in other jurisdictions), previous and existing contracts with the Authority The
proponent’s technological and environmental expertise, capacity and financial resources should be
outlined, and the proponent’s environmental record for this work and any previous comparable works
should be summarised as well as how they intend to support commitments made elsewhere in the
application.
1.5. This report
This section should constitute a guide for users of the Environmental Impact Statement on how to
effectively use the information contained in the Environmental Impact Statement.
1.5.1. Scope
Provide detail as to what is and is not included, and which risks have been prioritised and which received
less emphasis, in this Environmental Impact Statement, based on the Scoping Report and previous
feedback from the Authority and Stakeholders. Link to other supporting information.
1.5.2. Report structure
This subsection should refer to the prescribed structure of the template but should also indicate where
to find information that is not obvious from the table of contents, for example in cases where the
Environmental Impact Statement relates to a larger project covering several Mining Areas within the
Contract Area or for an Environmental Impact Statement that contains a large volume of information
(especially multiple volumes). Authorship should be provided for chapters.
1.5.3. Consultation overview
Provide overview of mandatory, as well as any voluntary stakeholder consultation processes and
consultations.
Section 2
18

[Page 19]
2.1. Applicable national and international legislation policies and procedures
Outline the national and international legislation, procedures and policies, for example those adopted in
accordance with Article 209 of the Convention to prevent, reduce and control pollution of the Marine
Environment, including the coastline, from activities in the Area, as well as applicable rules, regulations
and procedures of the Authority, applicable Standards and taking into consideration Guidelines and the
relevant Regional Environmental Management Plan, that is applicable to the proposed Exploitation
activities in the Area, including any guidance provided for implementation and how the proposed
operation will comply with them.
2.2. Other applicable national legislation, policies and regulations
Outline any other legislation, policies, regulations or Sustainable Development Bills that do not
necessarily apply specifically to seabed mining or the environment, but may be relevant to the proposal
(e.g., shipping regulations, maritime declarations, flag State laws, climate. This section should also refer
to national regulations and laws that relate to the effects of Exploitation activities on coastal States [].
2.3. Applicable international and regional agreements
In addition to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1994 Agreement relating to
the Implementation of Part XI of the Convention, list the international and regional agreements
applicable to the operation, (whether directly or via incorporation into domestic laws cited in section 2.2
above), such as relevant conventions, including Annexes and Guidelines, of the International Maritime
Organization related to Protection of the environment, biodiversity and safety. These include the
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), the Ballast Water Management Convention (BWMC),
the International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships and the 1996
Protocol thereof and the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Convention on Migratory Species
of Wild Animals and the international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas
beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ); and describe how the proposed operation will comply with them.
2.4. Other applicable standards, principles and Guidelines
Discuss applicable standards and Guidelines, including those mandated by the source(s) of funding for
the operations, that will be adhered to or aligned with throughout the operation, such as those of the
Authority not already included in section 2.1, the Equator Principles, the Environmental Management
Standards of the International Organization for Standardization, the Code for Environmental
Management of Marine Mining of the International Marine Minerals Society, the Performance Standards
on Environmental and Social Sustainability of the International Finance Corporation and the Standards
of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
2.5. National Processes related to Sponsoring State permits
Describe any national processes followed and permits received from the Sponsoring State in relation to
the Environmental Impact Assessment.
Section 3
3.1. Project area definition
3.1.1. Location
Include coordinates of the project area, detailed location maps (drawn to scale), showing the relevant
sites proposed as Contract Area and Mining Area and any other features that can be usefully marked
19

[Page 20]
upon the map at the time of application, including the locations of Impact Reference Zones and
Preservation Reference Zones as well as locations of other nearby contract areas or known seabed
infrastructure. Provide general location of the project on a regional map.
[Provide a map (drawn to scale), and list the coordinates detailing the location of the project area, with
the proposed Contract Area, the sequence of areas planned to be mined (Mined Areas), the Impact
Reference Zones (IRZ) and Preservation Reference Zones (PRZ) for each Mined Area, and the presumed
impact zones covering the benthic and pelagic extent of sediment plumes created by the Exploitation
activities. Add any other features that can be usefully marked upon the map at the time of application,
including the locations of other nearby contract areas or known seabed infrastructure. Provide general
location of the project on a regional map.]
The map should indicate Areas of Particular Environmental Interest, Sites/Areas in Need of Protection,
or other sites designated for particular status under the rules, regulations, procedures of the Authority,
applicable Standards and taking into consideration Guidelines, or relevant Regional Environmental
Management Plan, [as well as area-based designations] of other competent authorities, as well as
information on any other known conservation or spatial measures and other uses of the Marine
Environment (e.g. submarine cables and pipelines, long-standing scientific research sites and established
fishing areas) in the vicinity of the project area. The map shall also identify the nearest coastal States
and States that may be affected by Exploitation activities, and any adjacent [] contract sites. This map
may be the same as the map supplied in Annex 1 Section II.
3.1.2. Associated activities
Describe the supporting activities and infrastructure required (e.g., transportation corridors, ports for
disembarkation of vessels, ports for unloading of ore that are outside the direct mining site, anchoring
areas for vessels and machinery).
3.2. Mineral resource
Provide details of the type of resource proposed for extraction (e.g. sea floor massive sulphides,
polymetallic nodules, ferromanganese crusts), the type, size, shape, tonnage, volume grade and
distribution pattern of the Mineral deposits. Estimates of the inferred indicated resource should be
provided on the basis of the international CRIRSCO reporting template or national accepted codes (NI
43-101, JORC Code) and the official Mineral classification of the Authority (PMN, PMS and CFC).
3.3. Project components
Provide background information on the proposal and the technologies and equipment to be employed,
and include the subsections set out below.
3.3.1. Project scale
Provide an overview of the spatial (horizontal and vertical) and temporal (seasonal and annual) scales
of the Exploitation activities , including volumes, depth of penetration into the seabed. Provide an
overview of physical, chemical, geological and oceanographic properties of material to be recovered,
dewatered and deposited or discharged into the water column or back to the seabed, and the target depth
range for any such discharge, [in accordance with the applicable Standards and Guidelines]. This should
include an account of the [residual] area to be directly impacted over time, including the water column
and seafloor beyond the Contract Area, if applicable, as well as the likely extent of any secondary
impacts (e.g., sediment plumes, noise, light), which will be discussed in greater detail later.
3.3.2. Mining Equipment
Describe any equipment expected to [be used] [] for mining and support operations (e.g., mining
vessels/platforms, supply vessels, barges), including the anticipated frequency of vessel movements for
20

[Page 21]
these activities. Also, including a description of any specific technologies developed to reduce impacts
should be included.
Provide details of methodologies of exploitation (drilling, dredging, excavating, disposing of waste,
constructing and operating or maintaining Installations, pipelines and other devices) and give
specifications of the technologies to be employed in relation to Best Environmental Practice, including
relevant diagrams and drawings, that address: the Mining Workplan, timelines and the general mining
sequence, the technologies to be engaged in Exploitation activities , the depth of penetration into the
seabed the specific technologies developed to reduce the direct impact of Exploitation activities (e.g.
noise, light, plumes) and other details of the Exploitation activities subsea and on the surface. Describe
the energy requirements of the requisite machinery.
3.3.3. Transport and materials handling
Provide a description of all methods to be used to transport the Mineral-bearing ore, including from the
sea floor to the surface [and how it relates] to Best Environmental Practice, and any methods related to
the trans-shipment of the Mineral-bearing ore, including transfers at sea. [] Also, [include] a description
of any [measures and] technologies developed to [avoid,] reduce [and Mitigate] impacts [anywhere] in
the water column ([e.g.] generation of plume at the seafloor, turbidity in the water column, addition of
bottom sediments to the surface waters)[] during the different phases for collection, separation, lifting,
transportation, processing, and discharge of effluents.
3.3.4. On-site processing
Provide a detailed description of the plan for processing of the mineralized material that will occur
within or above the Area [and how it relates] to Best Environmental Practice, including water column
activities (such as riser pipe transfer) and shipboard processing. Include a description of any methods to
be used on the sea floor to separate the mineralized material from surrounding sediment and/or rock, as
well as any dewatering and separation of the mineralized material at the surface.
This section should also cover any disposal of seawater[] and include the spatial layout of the activities
over time which will provide a comprehensive map of the disturbance area from which to assess harm
to the Marine Environment.
Include a description of the waste management, transport, disposal and discharge of sediment, wastes or
other effluents into the Marine Environment and the disposal of waste from general ship operations,
including the specific technologies and methods to be adopted to reduce harmful impacts of such
disposal to the Marine Environment. The description should acknowledge respective [] Standards and
Guidelines [of the Authority] as well as other applicable legal frameworks. Describe the management
of shipboard wastes to be transported to shore-based disposal facilities, including the handling and
management of hazardous materials , together with a description of the nature of such material and its
transportation, storage and disposal. [] Also, a description of any specific technologies developed to
reduce impacts should be included.
3.4. Commissioning
Describe the pre-production activities that will take place with regard to the establishment and set-up of
the site for Exploitation activities. The management of this process (such as the establishment of safety
zones around vessels) should also be described.
3.5. Construction and operating standards
Outline the design codes or certification standards to which the equipment will be or has been built, as
well as the operating standards that will be applied to Exploitation activities, including [any relevant]
Best Available Technology and Best Environmental Practice [guidance] issued by the [] Authority. This
section should include subsections such as those set out below.
21

[Page 22]
3.5.1. Design codes
3.5.2. Health and safety
3.5.3. Workforce description
This section should also outline capacity-building objectives and commitments.
3.6. Decommissioning and Closure
Describe the steps that will occur when the Exploitation activities are completed or in the event of an
emergency, including the Decommissioning and removal of offshore infrastructure or the temporary
suspension of Exploitation activities, under a Closure Plan.
3.7. Other alternatives considered
Provide an account of alternative options that were rigorously explored and objectively evaluated,
including a no-action alternative, that were considered and rejected in favour of the current proposal
with justification as to why the alternatives were rejected. Aspects should include the selection of the
mine site, mine production scenarios, equipment design and engineering decisions, including
technologies selected to reduce the direct impact of Exploitation activities, Environmental Impacts,
financial feasibility, transport and materials handling, shipboard processing and stakeholder support. A
no mining scenario must be included.
3.8 Environmental management measures to Mitigate impact
Provide a summary description of [the sufficiency of information on environmental management
measures and] [] measures taken to [avoid, reduce and] Mitigate adverse impacts to the physical,
chemical, geological, biological, socioeconomic and sociocultural environment, [while developing the
project].
3.9. Development timetable (detailed schedule)
Provide a description of the overall timetable, from initiation and equipment construction through the
implementation of the mining programme, to the Decommissioning and closure of operations. The
description should include the major phases of the operation as well as the milestone dates on which
relevant tasks are expected to be completed. Information on the development timetable provided under
this section should clearly communicate the different phases in the development proposal. For reasons
of clarity, a flow chart or a Gantt or PERT (Programme Evaluation and Review Technique) chart should
be used where appropriate. Information provided in this section should include the following:
(a) The funding arrangement for the proposed activity, or whether the availability of funds is subject to
this or other approvals being granted;
(a) bis Timing of expected regulatory approvals;
(b) Pre-construction activities including the development and testing of mining equipment, operations
and systems in situ (if applicable);
(c) A construction schedule and staging timetable;
(d) An infrastructure development schedule;
(e) A monitoring schedule (during and after operations); and
(f) A Closure schedule.
Whether the availability of funds is subject to approvals should be noted on the timetable.
22

[Page 23]
3.12. Studies completed
Describe any prior research/Exploration that could provide relevant information for this Environmental
Impact Statement and future activities. These studies should be detailed in the appendices.
3.13. Methodology for Collecting Baseline Data
For each of the baseline descriptions of the Marine Environment in sections 4 [], describe the
methodology for collecting and analysing baseline data, including:
spatial and temporal extent of sampling;
spatial and temporal frequency of sampling;
gear used for sampling and any modifications or calibrations conducted to the gear;
results of power analysis;
limitations of sampling and how this may impact certainty of impact assessments; and
any cooperation with other research programmes in the Area, such as with the Authority, States, other
Contractors, or non-governmental organizations.
Highlight any deviations from baseline data collection requirements provided in relevant Standards and
Guidelines, and the Regional Environmental Management Plan, and provide a rationale for those
deviations.
Assess the sufficiency of baseline data collected and compiled in view of the aim to establish mining-
related environmental change in relation to natural variability.
Raw baseline data [] used to analyse and provide a description of the Marine Environment shall be
included in the Annexes of the Environmental Impact Statement or, if the data [has] been previously
submitted to the Authority, the applicant may provide a link to the Authority’s database where the data
[is ] stored or other location where such information has been made available online.
3.14. Methodology for Summarizing Baseline Data
Provide a description of the methodology used to summarize baseline data collected. This shall include:
(a) description and justification of transformations performed to the data and analyses used to summarize
the data;
(b) a list of program(s) used to analyse results;
I a list of methods to determine species identification and life history; and
(d) any limitations associated with the results of the analysis.3.15. Methodology for Assessment of
potential Environmental Impacts and Environmental Effects to the Marine Environment
For each assessment of potential Environmental Impacts and Environmental Effects in sections 7 and 8
and socioeconomic [and sociocultural] environment in section 9, describe the methodology used to
assess impacts and Environmental Effects from proposed operations and alternatives considered in
section 3.7. in line with the applicable regulations and Standards and taking into consideration
Guidelines.
Data [and], predictive models used to analyse and provide a description of the Marine Environment shall
be included in the Annexes to the Environmental Impact Statement or, if the data [and/or] model has
been previously submitted to the Authority, other location where such information has been made
available online. Each description of methodology used to assess impacts shall include:
a description and justification of analyses and models used to summarize the data; and
any limitations associated with the analysis or results.
23

[Page 24]
Section 4
4.1. Key messages
Provide an overview of key content (this information can be provided in a box that contains up to 6
bullet points on either the main aspects covered or the main findings).
4.2. Regional overview
Describe the general baseline environmental conditions [and expected trends and variability] of the site
and Impact Area, in accordance with the Standards and taking into consideration Guidelines on baseline
data collection, including but not limited to the physical, chemical and geological oceanographic setting
within a broader regional context and taking into account the applicable Regional Environmental
Management Plan. This should be a brief section that includes a map. A more detailed site-specific and
Impact Area description will be provided in accordance with the sections below.
4.3. Studies completed
Describe any prior research/Exploration studies (including methods used for completing the studies
based on Best Available [] Techniques that could provide relevant information for this Environmental
Impact Statement. This research should be detailed in the appendices [and/]or in reports attached to the
appendices. [The environmental baseline data collected for the Authority, as outlined in exploration
contract conditions, should accompany the Environmental Impact Statement.]
4.4. Meteorology and air quality
Provide a general Characterization of the local meteorology (e.g., wind directions and speeds, seasonal
and interannual patterns and variability). Provide description of air quality, including chemical
characteristics. This section may be most relevant to surface operations and the general risk assessment.
4.5. Geological properties and habitat classification
Provide a baseline description of the nature and extent of the Mineral resource and bedrock within a
broader geological context. Describe the geological petrographic and geomorphological setting of the
mining sites, the Impact Areas, and the designated [Impact and] Preservation Reference Zones []
including sea floor mapping (bathymetry and backscatter), high-resolution sub-bottom profiling, and
sedimentation rates, and refer to submarine features such as hydrothermal vents, seamounts abyssal hills
and canyons as appropriate.
Provide habitat classification using an appropriate system as prescribed in the applicable Standard,
taking into consideration the Regional Environmental Management Plan.
4.6. Oceanographic setting
Provide a description of oceanographic aspects including but not limited to thermohaline conditions,
optical properties and turbidity, surface, []water [column] and bottom currents regime, tides, waves,
turbulence, and oceanographic fronts, eddies and climate change projections, including spatial variation
at and above the site. Seasonal and longer-term variability is an important element. Detail is required on
the regional setting, as well as the specific mining site and Impact Area, and the designated [Impact and]
Preservation Reference Zones [], and should include changes in physical conditions and processes
according to depth and horizontal distance from the proposed mine site to boundaries of the Impact
Area. For activities conducted in areas of seamount chains, hydrothermal vent fields, trenches and
canyons or other areas with complex bathymetry, oceanographic currents will be influence by
24

[Page 25]
topographic forcing and will require a more detailed oceanographic assessment, including targeted
sampling programs, to determine the Impact Area. Climate change projections should also be included.
4.7. Chemical oceanographic setting
Provide a description of water mass characteristics at the mining sites, the Impact Areas, and the
designated [Impact and] Preservation Reference Zones [] and above the sites at various depths of the
water column, including the structure and development of the oxygen minimum zone in particular near
the sea floor (up to 200m above bottom), that includes nutrients, particle loads, temperature and
dissolved gas profiles, vent-fluid characteristics if applicable, turbidity, etc.
Provide a description of chemical oceanographic properties at the mining sites, the Impact Areas, and
the designated [Impact and] Preservation Reference Zones [], throughout the water column and
horizontally from the proposed mine site, that includes nutrients, particle loads, temperature, oxygen,
salinity, density, particulate and dissolved organic matter, pH, chemical composition, including, but not
limited to, concentrations of trace metals, dissolved gas profiles, depth range and characteristics of
oxygen minimum zone, redox regimes, carbonate saturation, hydrocarbon and spatial (horizontal and
vertical) and temporal (seasonal and interannual) variability of these properties, and vent-fluid
characteristics if applicable.
4.8. Seabed substrate and sub-seabed characteristics
Provide a description of seabed substrate and sub-seabed composition (to benthic subsurface layers) of
the wider mine sites, the Impact Areas, and the designated [Impact and] Preservation Reference Zones,
including, but not limited to, physical, chemical, geological and oceanographic properties, specific
gravity, bulk density, sediment composition, physical and chemical composition of pore-water and pore-
water profiles, grain size, mineralogy sediment mechanics, dissolved and particulate organic and
inorganic carbon, nutrients, carbonates, redox regimes, and spatial (horizontal and vertical) and temporal
(seasonal and interannual) variability in these characteristics). Substrate composition shall be described
to a depth below the seafloor prescribed in the Standard on Baseline Information and taking into
consideration [the applicable] the Regional Environmental Management Plan.
4.8. bis. Rare or sensitive habitats
Identify and describe the physical and chemical characteristics of rare or sensitive habitats in line with
the respective international guidelines (FAO 2009, Azores Criteria 2010) [and policy decisions (inter
alia from UN and CBD) on hydrothermal vents, ridges, seamounts, as well as oceanographic fronts or
eddies, abyss hills and canyons and other geological and oceanographic features.] [part in square
brackets suggested deleted]
4.9. Natural hazards
Provide a description and trend analysis of variation related to applicable potential natural hazards for
the site, including, but not limited to, volcanism, seismic activity, cyclone/hurricane, tsunamis, climate-
related oceanographic changes and variability, slides, slumps, etc. and how these may develop in future,
e.g. as a consequence of climate change.
4.10. Noise and light
Provide a description of local ambient noise and light at the seabed, throughout the water column and at
the surface, including, but not limited to, light intensity, backscatter, and attenuation, bioluminescence,
and spatial (horizontal and vertical) and temporal (seasonal and interannual) variability in these
characteristics, indicating pertinence to fauna where known.
25

[Page 26]
4.11. Greenhouse gas emissions
Provide a description and quantification of the level of gas and fluid emissions from anthropogenic
activities [related to the proposed Exploitation activities in the proposed Mining Area ], as well as those
affecting sea floor and water-column chemistry.
[4.12. Climate Change
Description of the expected changes in physical and chemical oceanographic conditions and processes
in the broader area of the mine site due to climate change.]
4.13. Summary of the existing physicochemical environment
Summarize key findings and include notes on special considerations for rare or sensitive habitats,
hydrothermal vents, ridges, seamounts and oceanographic fronts or eddies, abyss hills, fracture zones
and canyons and other geological and oceanographic features described in this section. It is anticipated
that this summary will be up to one page and be more extensive than the key messages section.
Section 5
The description of the site should be divided by depth regime (surface, midwater from 200m depth to
50m above bottom and benthic including benthopelagic, where appropriate) or otherwise as indicated
in the relevant Regional Environmental Management Plan and provide a description of the various
biological components and communities that are present in or utilize the area. The Standard on baseline
environmental data collection shall guide the drafting of this section by providing information on the
minimum amount of detail required for an acceptable baseline description. The detail in this section is
expected to be based on a prior Environmental Risk Assessment that identified, and thus the elements
that need to be measured and assessed in the Environmental Impact Assessment.
5.1. Key messages
Provide key messages (overview of main findings, covered in six or fewer bullet points).
5.2. Regional overview
Provide regional context for the baseline environmental conditions [and expected trends and
variability]of the mining site and Impact Areas, and the designated [Impact and] Preservation Reference
Zones [], including but not limited to the general biological setting, [taking into account] in accordance
with the applicable Regional Environmental Management Plan. This should be a brief section that
includes a habitat classification map. A more detailed description of the mining site, the [Impact and]
Preservation Reference Zones [] and Impact Area description will be provided in accordance with the
sections below.
5.3. Studies completed
Describe any prior research/Exploration studies (including methods used for completing the studies
based on Best Available [Science using Best Available Techniques] that could provide relevant
information for this Environmental Impact Statement and future activity. This research should be
detailed in the appendices [and/or in reports], and the environmental reference baseline data collected
for the Authority, as outlined in the Exploration contract conditions, should accompany the
Environmental Impact Statement.
5.4. Biological environment
26

[Page 27]
Provide a description of biological and ecological properties in the region and the mine site, with special
focus on the designated Preservation Reference Zones PRZ and the total mine site and Impact Area,
including diversity, abundance, biomass, life history parameters, relevant behaviour, including feeding
rates, community-level analyses, connectivity, trophic relationships, resilience, ecosystem functions and
services as well as seasonality and spatial (horizontal and vertical) and temporal variability. Any work
on ecosystem models and appropriate ecosystem indicators, etc., should also be presented here. This
section should span the size range from megafauna to microbial communities and shall be guided by the
variables given by the Standard for the establishment of baseline environmental data.
The description of the benthic [and pelagic communities and] ecosystem [with functional relationships]
is structured by depth range, as this enables a direct link to the source and location of an impact. For
each depth zone, (at least surface, []water [column] and [seafloor] as below) there should be an inventory
of the known taxonomic/ecological groups (e.g., plankton, fish, marine mammals, marine turtles,
benthic microbial invertebrates, demersal scavengers), in accordance with the Authority’s Guidelines.
Describe the biological communities and ecosystem functions, structured by depth ranges in accordance
with the applicable Standards and taking into consideration Regional Environmental Management
Plans, [which] may encompass:
surface seawater
epipelagic zone (< 200 metres)
mesopelagic zone (200-1000 metres),
bathypelagic zone (1000 - 4000 metres),
abyssopelagic zone (4000 - 6000 metres),
hadalpelagic zone (> 6000 meters),
demersal zone (part of the water column near to and significantly affected by the seabed), and
benthic zone.
The description should evaluate the temporal and spatial variability in distribution and composition.
The description should include the size and habitat distributions of the fauna and their life history stages
(such as larval and juvenile stages, which differ from the adult stage) as well as trophic pathways.
Discussions of species and communities should include considerations of whether they are endemic
(restricted to just the site, resource substrate or region) or are known to be rare, threatened or endangered.
Migratory and highly mobile species should be included where foraging ranges / migration pathways /
management units have been noted as overlapping with proposed operations during scoping.
The climate Mitigation functions and services of the ocean shall also be described (including CO2
update and sequestration, or nutrient cycling).
5.4.1. Surface
Describe the biological communities from the surface to a depth of 200 metres, including [] plankton
(phytoplankton and zooplankton, microbial plankton and organic matter), micro-nekton, surface/near-
surface fish such as tuna, and seabirds, marine turtles and marine mammals. Address factors provided
in 5.4, as well as spatial and temporal variability and trends, in distribution and composition.
5.4.2. [Midwater] [Water Column]
Describe the pelagic communities and their habitat in the open water from a depth of 200 metres down
to 50 metres above the sea floor, and include particulate organic matter, microbes, zooplankton, nekton,
mesopelagic, bathypelagic and abyssopelagic fishes and deep-diving mammals. Particular focus should
be given to gelatinous and other fragile taxa which may be most vulnerable to sediment loads.] Address
factors provided in 5.4, as well as spatial and temporal variability.
27

[Page 28]
5.4.3. Benthic
Describe the known benthic microbial, invertebrate and fish communities, including infauna, epifauna,
benthopelagic fauna, and demersal fish and scavengers, up to an altitude of [ca.] 50 metres above the
sea floor [(or the height of the nepheloid layer)] and at least 5 meters below (into the sediments). This
inventory should include considerations of species richness, biodiversity, faunal densities, taxonomic
uniqueness, community structures and connectivity, etc. Ecosystem functions, such as bioturbation,
habitat and food [supply] and elemental cycling etc. should also be covered in this section. Address
factors provided in 5.4, as well as spatial and temporal variability and patchiness.
5.4.3.bis. Rare or sensitive habitats and species
Identify and describe the biological characteristics of rare or sensitive habitats and species potentially
affected by the planned Exploitation activities. The identification (as in 4.8bis) shall be guided by the
respective international guidelines (FAO 2009, Azores Criteria 2010) [and policy decisions (UNGA,
CBD) and include features such as hydrothermal vents, ridges, seamounts, as well as oceanographic
fronts or eddies, abyss hills and canyons and other geological and oceanographic features.] Identify any
unique, rare and threatened elements and their potential vulnerability to the effects of mining, outline
which habitats and communities can be considered representative and their distribution, indicate
existence and connectivity to the same habitats and communities outside the mine site and the potential
impact zone.]
5.4.4. Alt. Ecosystem and community-level description
Summarize existing community and ecosystem-level studies. This should include integration of
connectivity studies (e.g. life history and recruitment research), trophic interactions and the linkages
between food energy and contaminants in the food chain (including benthopelagic couplings) and
ecosystem functioning / services. Food energy linkages and the complexity of the food web should be
included, giving consideration to the impacts that may result from contaminants or other disruptions to
the food web. Understanding across depths should be provided. Emphasis might be placed on knowledge
of trophic levels, the degree of interaction between benthic and pelagic communities, whether there are
specialized predators that could be more vulnerable than generalists, and the complexity of the food web
and species interactions, with a view to gaining an idea of the resilience of the system to disturbances.
It is important to consider wider community relationships to enable assessments to move beyond
community descriptions to incorporate potential changes in ecosystem function. [Identify, preserve and
distribute to the scientific community any unique, rare and threatened elements, outline which habitats
and communities can be considered representative and their distribution, indicate existence and
connectivity to the same habitats and communities outside the mine site and the potential impact zone.]
5.5. Summary of the existing biological environment
Summarize the findings focusing on key ecosystems and species determined above. It is envisaged that
this summary will be up to one page in length.
Section 6
6.1. Key messages
Provide key messages (overview of main findings, covered in six or fewer bullet points).
6.2. Existing uses
6.2.1. Fisheries
28

[Page 29]
Relevant fisheries shall be described here to further assess the socioeconomic impacts. This should
include description of areas of significance for migratory fish stocks, such as spawning grounds, nursery
areas or feeding sites. Any closed fishery areas such as VME closures, MPAs, or voluntary closures must
be named and taken into consideration. Provide a ‘heat map’ showing important fishery areas in relation
to proposed operations and note any areas of interaction or cumulative impact.
6.2.2. Marine traffic
This section describes the non-project-related marine traffic occurring within the Contract Area and uses
the Regional Environmental Management Plan in accordance with IALA's regulations to provide a
summary of regional movements. Provide a ‘heat map’ showing densities of marine traffic in relation to
proposed operations and note any areas of interaction or cumulative impact. Provide this per season if
repeatable seasonal variation exists.
6.2.3. Submarine cables
This section describes the [known] in situ non-project-related submarine cables occurring within the
Contract Area. Provide a map showing known submarine cables in relation to proposed operations and
note any areas of interaction or cumulative impact.
6.2.4. Tourism
Describe areas used by cruise liners and for game fishing, sightseeing, marine mammal watching and
other relevant tourism activities. Provide a ‘heat map’ showing densities of tourism in relation to
proposed operations and note any areas of interaction or cumulative impact. Provide this per season if
repeatable seasonal variation exists.
6.2.5. Marine scientific research
Outline the [past, present and planned] scientific research programmes taking place in the [region],
studying the essence of phenomena and processes occurring in the Marine Environment and the
interrelations between them.
6.2.5. Sociocultural values and uses
List sociocultural [values and] uses the project area (e.g., traditional navigation routes, migratory paths
of culturally significant marine species, sacred sites and waters associated with ritual or ceremonial
activities of Indigenous Peoples and local communities as well as known or suspected objects or sites
of an archaeological or historical nature, taking into account the work of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization referred to in Regulation 35(2).
6.2.6. Other
List other uses of the project area that are not related to the above (e.g., other, Exploitation projects
sports and leisure).
6.2. bis Planned uses
Describe the planned uses of the area for which information is publicly available (e.g. other Exploitation
Contracts, Exploration contracts, fisheries, maritime traffic, tourism, marine scientific research,
submarine cables, area-based management tools).
6.3. Sites of an archaeological, historical significance
29

[Page 30]
List any sites of archaeological or historical significance that are known to occur within the potential
area of impact. Provide a map as applicable showing known archaeological and historical sites in relation
to proposed operations and note any areas of interaction or cumulative impact taking into account the
work of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization referred to in Regulation
35(2).
6.4. Summary of existing socioeconomic and sociocultural environment
Summarize key findings regarding the socioeconomic and sociocultural environment. It is envisaged
that this section will be up to a page in length, and more extensive than the key messages.
Section 7
It should include for each component a description of:
(a) The [hazard: detailing the] source (action, temporal and spatial duration), [probability and frequency
of the risk] and [the] nature [and severity] of the disturbance;
(a) bis [Exposure characterization: evaluation and probability of exposure of the ecosystem
components (see section 5) to the identified hazard,] nature, duration and extent of any actual or potential
impact, including cumulative effects and taking into account ecological and biologically significant
areas;
(a) ter The methods used to determine impacts (including the assumptions and limitations of any impact
modelling or other analysis undertaken);
(b) Risk evaluation and management: Document how decisions were taken to determine] Measures to
prevent, Mitigate and manage such impacts; and
(c) The unavoidable residual impacts that will remain, including their expected longevity.
(d) The extent to which any potential impacts and Environmental Effects may occur [beyond the
Contract Area or] in areas under a State’s national jurisdiction.
The detail in this section is expected to be based on the Environmental Risk Assessment carried out
according to the relevant Regulations, Standards and by taking into consideration Guidelines that will
have identified the main impacts, and thus the elements that need to be emphasized in the Environmental
Impact Assessment.
7.1. Key messages
Provide an overview of the key content covered in section 7.
7.2. Description of potential impact categories
Provide an overview and description of the categories of potential impacts caused by [hazards owing to]
the proposed Exploitation activities.
Key elements that need to be included are:
(a) The major types of potential impacts, such as habitat removal, variations in communities’
composition, the creation of sediment plumes, dewatering plumes, noise, light, etc.;
(b) Descriptions of impact studies carried out during Exploration (e.g., component testing and the
resulting observations from the associated monitoring);
(b) bis. Descriptions of Test Mining studies undertaken prior to the application;
(c) Descriptions of the results of any Environmental Risk Assessments, which should be included as
separate reports or appendices where appropriate; and
30

[Page 31]
(d) Descriptions of the methods applied to describe and quantify impact categories and assessment from
impact to receptor (including the assumptions and limitations of any impact modelling undertaken);
7.2. bis. Description of impact pathways
The preferred approach for this template is to include for each receptor descriptions of:
(a) The methods used to determine the pathway from impact to receptor (including the assumptions and
limitations of any impact modelling undertaken);
(b) The source(s) of impact;
(c) The nature, spatial extent and temporal extent of potential impact(s), including cumulative impacts;
(d) Measures that will be taken to avoid, minimise or Mitigate such impacts; and
(e) The unavoidable (residual) impacts that will remain, including their expected longevity and outline
the measures that will be taken to ensure long-term site compliance with the environmental quality
objectives, quantitative thresholds, and indicators in accordance with these Regulations and the
applicable Standard, and taking into consideration Guidelines.
7.2. ter. Receptors and impacts
Receptors for which this will be done include:
(a) Meteorology and air quality
(b) Geology [and Geophysics]
(c) Physical oceanography
(d) Chemical oceanography of the mine site and Impact Area
(e) Seabed substrate characteristics
Impacts to be considered include:
(a) Sediment plume generation,
(b) Discharge of water,
(b)bis Energy flow pathways (such as hydrothermal fluid),
(c) Noise and light,
(d) Greenhouse gas emissions and climate change emissions (including estimated greenhouse gas
emissions and a greenhouse gas emissions assessment where appropriate)
Effects to be considered include:
(a) Changes in temperature and salinity of water,
(b) Optical characteristics / water clarity,
(c) Turbidity / particulate loading,
(d) Sediment characteristics (including changes in the sediment composition, grain size, density and
pore-water profiles),
(e) Discharge plumes (frequency, spatial extent, composition and concentration, etc.),
(f) Primary sediment plume (frequency, spatial extent, composition and concentration),
(g) Dissolved gas levels,
31

[Page 32]
(h) Nutrient levels,
(i) For a sea floor massive sulphide project, the modification of vent-fluid discharges, if present, should
be addressed.
7.8. Accidental events and Natural hazards
Discuss impacts of accidental events and the cumulative effects of the Exploitation activities in relation
to any natural hazards that could occur, including, but not limited to, volcanism, seismic activity,
cyclone/hurricane, tsunamis, etc. and the measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy or Mitigate those
impacts.
7.9. Noise and light
Provide a description of the expected emissions of noise and light from the proposed operations.
7.10 Greenhouse gas emissions and climate change
Provide an assessment of gas and chemical emissions from proposed operations, relative to emissions
both natural and anthropogenic activities. Subsections should include estimated greenhouse gas
emissions and a greenhouse gas emissions assessment where appropriate.
7.11. Cumulative impacts
Provide a description of the source of nature and extent of any interactions between various potential
Environmental Impacts and Environmental Effects across the environment. Where they may have
cumulative effects, they must be considered on both spatial and temporal scales over the lifetime of the
proposed Exploitation activities and in the post-Closure period and alternatives considered.
7.12. Proposed operations impacts
Cumulative within the mining site and Impact Area of the mining proposed herein.
7.13. Regional operation impacts
Cumulative between activities, actions, or natural phenomena, where known in the region.
7.14. Other issues
Outline here other, more general issues, as applicable.
7.15. Summary of residual effects
Summarize key findings on potential Environmental Impacts and Environmental Effects, environmental
management measures, and any potential impacts and effects to areas under any State’s national
jurisdiction. A table may be a useful summary format to pull together the above elements in a simple
visual mode. The table should include a column outlining the measures that will be taken to address
potential Environmental Impacts and manage residual effects and ensure long-term site compliance with
the environmental quality objectives, quantitative thresholds, and indicators in accordance with these
Regulations and the applicable Standard and taking into consideration Guidelines.
Section 8
32

[Page 33]
The analysis shall be structured by the depth ranges described in section 5 and shall for each component,
provide a description of:
(a) The [hazard detailing the] source (action, temporal and spatial duration) [of the risk] and nature of
the [ecological effects];
(a) bis. [Exposure characterization: evaluation and probability of exposure of the ecosystem components
(see section 5) to the identified hazard,] nature and extent (temporal and spatial) of any actual or potential
impact, including cumulative effects;
(a) ter. The methods used to determine impacts (including the assumptions and limitations of any impact
modelling or other analyses undertaken);
(b) [Risk evaluation and management: Document how decisions were taken to determine] Measures []
to prevent, Mitigate and manage such impacts with reference to the submitted Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan; []
(c) The unavoidable residual impacts that will remain, including their significance and expected
longevity.
(d) An evaluation of the impacts and effects against the applicable environmental goals and objectives,
indicators and thresholds as identified in the applicable environmental Standards and Guidelines and in
the applicable Regional Environmental Management Plan, [and]
(e) The extent to which any potential impacts and Environmental Effects may occur in areas beyond the
Contract Area or under a State’s national jurisdiction.
The detail in this section is expected to be based on the Environmental Risk Assessment, carried out
according to the applicable Regulations, Standards and taking into consideration Guidelines that will
have identified the main impacts, and thus the elements that need to be emphasized in the Environmental
Impact Assessment.
8.1. Key messages
This section should provide an overview of the key content covered in section 8.
8.1.bis. Description of the key sources of Environmental Impacts
This section should describe the key sources of [risks and] impacts on the Marine Environment from the
Exploitation activities.
8.2. Description of [hazards and the nature of] potential impact
Provide an overview and description of the categories of potential impacts caused by the hazards arising
from the proposed Exploitation activities and alternatives considered. This should introduce the major
types of impacts and their effects on the biotic environment, such as habitat removal, the crushing of
animals, the creation of sediment plumes, noise and light, etc. and be referred to in subsequent
descriptions and evaluations of potential Environmental Impacts and Environmental Effects from the
hazards posed by the proposed operation and alternatives considered. A description should be included
of any lessons learned from activities during the exploratory phase of the programme (e.g., mining
system component tests).
Key elements that need to be included are:
(a) Description of the major types of potential impacts, such as habitat removal, the biological effects of
sediment plumes and dewatering plumes, noise, light, etc. [Each impact has to be characterized by its
nature, duration and extent of any actual or potential exposure, including cumulative effects and taking
into account ecological and biologically significant areas, rare and fragile species and habitats.] These
impact categories should be used in subsequent descriptions and evaluations of potential Environmental
Impacts and Environmental Effects from the proposed operations.
(b) Descriptions of impact studies carried out during Exploration (e.g., component testing and the
resulting observations from the associated monitoring);
33

[Page 34]
(b) bis. Descriptions of Test Mining studies undertaken prior to the application; Descriptions of
the results of any Environmental Risk Assessments, which should be included as separate reports or
appendices where appropriate; and
(c) Descriptions of the methods applied to describe and quantify impact pathways and assessment in
line with the applicable Standards and taking into consideration Guidelines, i.e. [the Environmental
Impact Assessment ] Guideline.
8.2. bis Description of impact pathways
The preferred approach for this template is to include for each impact pathway an overarching
description of:
(a) The methods used to determine the pathway from impact to receptor (including the assumptions and
limitations of any impact modelling undertaken);
(b) The source(s) of impact
(c) The nature, spatial extent and temporal extent of potential impact(s), including cumulative impacts;
(d) Measures that will be taken to avoid, minimise or Mitigate such impacts; and
(e) The unavoidable (residual) impacts that will remain, including their expected longevity and outline
the measures that will be taken to ensure long-term site compliance with the environmental quality
objectives, quantitative thresholds, and indicators in accordance with these Regulations and the
applicable Standard, and taking into consideration Guidelines.
8.2.ter. [Assessment of risks] and impacts
[The Assessment of risks and impacts must be done in as much detail as possible for the following
community Receptors [including]:
(a) Microbial communities
(b) Phytoplankton]
(b)bis zooplankton and micronekton
(b)ter nekton
(b)quat benthopelagic fauna, including scavengers
(c) Meiofauna (infauna / epifauna)
(d) Macrofauna (infauna / epifauna / demersal fish)
(e) Megafauna, including surface/near-surface fish such as tuna, and seabirds, marine turtles and marine
mammals
As appropriate, these receptors are to be considered:
(a) at the surface (from the surface down to a depth of 200 metres)
(b) [for the water column] (from a depth of 200 metres down to 50 metres above the sea floor), [separate
for the different water masses, including deep diving and migratory species]
(c) up to an altitude of 50 metres above the sea floor, including zooplankton, [scavengers] nekton,
mesopelagic and bathypelagic fishes and deep-diving mammals.
Impact [categories] to be considered include:
(a) Sediment plume generation [(frequency, spatial extent, composition and concentration)],
(b) discharge [plumes]
[(b bis) Seafloor destruction]
(c) Noise and light [emissions]
34

[Page 35]
(d) Greenhouse gas emissions and climate change emissions (including estimated greenhouse gas
emissions and a greenhouse gas emissions assessment where appropriate).
Effects to be considered include:
(a) changes in temperature [] salinity [stratification and mixing] of water [column],
(b) optical characteristics / water clarity
(c) turbidity / particulate loading
(d) sediment characteristics (including changes in the sediment composition, grain size, density and
pore-water profiles)
(e) [effects of] discharge plumes, [Contamination and pollution, turbidity, temperature change]
(f) primary sediment plume (frequency, spatial extent, composition and concentration)
(g) dissolved gas levels
(h) nutrient levels
(i) For a sea floor massive sulphide project, the modification of vent-fluid discharges, if present, should
be addressed.
8.6. [Summary of] Ecosystem/community level [effects caused by the project]
[Analyse and] describe [potential and probable ] effects on the ecosystem [and ecosystem dynamics
during the term of contract and long-term ].
8.6.1. Potential [other effects and] impact to be addressed
8.6.1.1. Noise and light
Provide a description of the expected emissions of noise and light from the proposed operations and any
potential Environmental Effects, especially any impacts of noise on avoidance, masking and availability
of prey (e.g., on marine mammals) and fish. [Indicate the range of light pollution and potential effects
in the different depths.] Provide a description of the measures that will be taken to ensure compliance
with applicable environmental quality objectives and quantitative thresholds for noise and light levels
for relevant fauna, in accordance with these Regulations and the applicable Standard, and taking into
consideration Guidelines.
8.6.1.2. Greenhouse gas emissions and climate change
Effects of mining on ocean climate Mitigation functions and services should be described (including
any anticipated alteration of CO2 uptake and sequestration, or nutrient cycling.)
[8.6.2. Environmental management measures to Mitigate impacts]
Moved to section “8.7 bis”
8.7. Cumulative effects
The nature and extent of any interactions between various impacts where they may have cumulative
effects must be considered. This should include an evaluation of the spatial and temporal intensity of
mining and its effects on other impacts including existing uses considered in the Assessment and
described in Section 9 of the Environmental Impact Statement as well as an evaluation of the resulting
cumulative effects to the ecological balance of the Marine Environment, including the spatial and
35

[Page 36]
temporal extent of such effects. Describe how spatial and temporal cumulation will differ between faunal
groups and different habitats.
Provide a description of the source of nature and extent of any interactions between various potential
Environmental Impacts and Environmental Effects across the environment. Where they may have
cumulative effects, they must be considered on both spatial and temporal scales over the lifetime of the
proposed Exploitation activities and in the post-Closure period and alternatives considered.
8.7.1. Proposed operations effects
Cumulative effects [of the proposed mining with all other known influences and effects, including from
other Exploitation activities,] within the scope of the site and Impact Area of the mining proposed herein.
8.7.2. Regional operations effects
Cumulative effects [on a regional scale, due to Authority-related and other] activities to be analysed by
the Secretariat according to the [Regional Environmental Management Plans. The analysis will
periodically be provided in a regional quality status report.]
[8.7 bis. Mitigation hierarchy measures to avoid, reduce and Mitigate the effects caused by the project
8.7bis.1 Decision-making
Explain here how decisions were taken to Mitigate Environmental Effects, and what were the goals to
be achieved.
8.7bis.2 Measures taken to avoid, reduce and Mitigate effects, including alternatives
8.7bis.3 Expected unavoidable residual effects
8.7bis.4 Restoration and Rehabilitation measures
Practicable Restoration and Rehabilitation of the project area – approach. The Restoration and
Rehabilitation of the project area should be considered as a part of the Mitigation hierarchy. At this stage
in the Environmental Assessment Process, there might be no final knowledge on the potential of
Restoration and Rehabilitation in the area, so a plan should be proposed to develop this knowledge
throughout the lifespan of the project and to prepare the decision on the issue at the end of the project.
This should be done in accordance with applicable Standards and taking into consideration Guidelines.]
8.8. Summary of residual effects
Summarize key findings on potential Environmental Impacts and Environmental Effects, environmental
management measures, residual effects, and any potential impacts and effects to areas under any State’s
national jurisdiction. Information on potential recovery times following disturbance and the longevity
of residual effects should be included. This will give readers an understanding of the temporal
component and efficacy of proposed Mitigation measures. A table may be a useful summary format to
pull together the above elements in a simple visual mode. The table should include a column outlining
the measures that will be taken to address potential Environmental Impacts and residual effects and
ensure long-term site compliance with the environmental quality objectives, quantitative thresholds, and
indicators in accordance with these Regulations and the applicable Standard and taking into
consideration Guidelines.
36

[Page 37]
[8.9 Practicable restoration and rehabilitation of the project area]
Moved to section “8.7 bis.4.”
Section 9
9.1. Key messages
This section should provide an overview of the key content covered in section 9.
9.1. bis. Description of potential impact categories
Provide an overview and description of the categories of potential impacts caused by the proposed
Exploitation activities. Key elements that need to be included are:
(a) the major types of potential impacts, such as habitat removal, the creation of sediment plumes, noise,
light, etc. These impact categories should be used in subsequent descriptions and evaluations of potential
Environmental Impacts and Environmental Effects from the proposed operations;
(b) Descriptions of impact studies carried out during Exploration (e.g., component testing and the
resulting observations from the associated monitoring);
(c) bis Descriptions of Test Mining studies undertaken prior to the application;
(d) Descriptions of the results of any Environmental Risk Assessments, which should be included as
separate reports or appendices where appropriate; and
(e) Descriptions of the methods applied to describe and quantify impact pathways and assessment.
9.1. ter. Description of impact pathways
The preferred approach for this template is to include for each impact pathway an overarching
description of:
(a) The source;
(a)ter The methods used to determine impacts (including the assumptions and limitations of any impact
modelling undertaken);
(a)bis The nature, spatial extent and temporal extent of potential impacts, including cumulative impacts;
(b) Measures that will be taken to avoid, minimise or Mitigate such impacts, including a comparative
analysis of how measures taken may differ across alternative operations considered;
(c) The unavoidable (residual) impacts that will remain, including their expected longevity. The detail
in this section is expected to be based on the scoping Environmental Risk Assessment that will have
identified the main impacts, and thus the elements that need to be emphasized in the Environmental
Impact Assessment; and
(d) The extent to which any potential impacts and effects may occur in areas under a State’s national
jurisdiction.
9.2.Impact identification
9.2.1. Impacts on existing human uses
For each of the following marine uses, describe:
Potential impacts and effects and issues to be addressed;
Environmental management measures to Mitigate impacts and effects;
Residual impacts and effects; and
37

[Page 38]
Potential impacts and effects in areas under any State’s national jurisdiction.
9.2.1.1 Fisheries and biological conditions
A description of potential impacts, e.g., effects from light and noise on fisheries and biological
conditions, with proposed management measures and a description of residual impacts.
9.2.1.2bis Submarine cables
A description of potential impacts on [known] non-project-related submarine cables occurring within
the project area, along with proposed management measures and a description of residual impacts.
9.2.1.3 Tourism
A description of potential impacts and issues to be addressed, along with proposed management
measures and a description of residual impacts.
9.2.1.4 Marine scientific research
A description of potential impacts and issues to be addressed, along with proposed management
measures and a description of residual impacts, according to the IALA’s regulations.
9.2.2 Impacts on Sociocultural values and uses
A description of potential impacts and issues to be addressed pertaining to sociocultural uses of the area
(e.g., traditional navigation routes, migratory paths of culturally significant marine species, sacred sites
and waters associated with ritual or ceremonial activities of Indigenous Peoples and local communities),
along with proposed management measures and a description of residual impacts.
9.2.3 Impacts on Ecosystem Functions and Services
A description of potential impacts of the operation on any ecosystem functions and services, for
example, carbon burial and sequestration, taking into account the relevant Guidance.
9.2.4 Other impacts
List other potential impacts that are not related to the above (e.g., submarine cables, other Mineral
Exploration or Exploitation projects).
9.2.5 Impacts on Planned uses
Describe the potential impacts on planned uses of the area for which information is publicly available
(e.g. fisheries, maritime traffic, tourism, marine scientific research, submarine cables, area-based
management tools).
9.2.6 Impacts on Area-based management tools
A description of potential impacts and cross-boundary issues to be addressed, along with proposed
management measures and a description of residual impacts.
9.3. Impacts on Sites of an archaeological or historical nature
38

[Page 39]
Describe, as applicable, potential impacts to sites of archaeological, or historical significance that are
known to occur within the potential area of impact, along with proposed management measures, taking
into account the work of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization referred
to in Regulation 35(2).
9.4. Gender Impact analysis
Assess and analyse how the proposed operations may impact on gender roles and relationships.
9.5. Summary of socioeconomic and sociocultural environment
Summarize findings on management measures, residual effects, and any potential impacts and effects,
(including to sociocultural conditions). A table may be a useful summary format to pull together the
above elements in a simple visual mode. Potential cumulative effects should also be included.
Section 10
For each component include:
(a) The nature and extent of any impact;
(b) Measures that will be taken to avoid, Mitigate or minimize such impact; and
(c) Residual impacts.
10.1. Extreme weather
For example: hurricanes/cyclones.
10.2. Natural hazards
For example: volcanic eruptions, seismic events.
10.3. Accidental events
For example: leakage or spillage of hazardous material, fires and explosions, and collisions, including
potential loss of equipment.
10.4. Maritime safety and interactions with shipping
Provide a description of predicted maritime safety issues and potential interactions with other vessels
from the proposed activities with reference to compliance with the relevant conventions.
10.5. Emergency Response and Contingency Plan
Provide a description of an Emergency Response and Contingency Plan.
10.6. Waste management
Provide a description of proposed vessel waste management, with reference to compliance with relevant
conventions, legislation and principles, and methods of cleaner production and energy balance.
39

[Page 40]
10.7 Balast Water management
Provide a description of proposed vessel balast water management where applicable, with reference to
compliance with relevant rules and principles, and methods of cleaner production and energy balance.
[10.8. Hazards arising from natural, accidental and discharge events
Discuss any impacts of accidental events and the cumulative effects of the Exploitation activities and
natural hazards, and the measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy or Mitigate those impacts.]
[suggested deleted]
Section 10 bis
Identify any relevant areas of uncertainty and gaps in knowledge and their implications for the
Environmental Impact Assessment and its findings
Section 11
11.1. Organizational structure and responsibilities
This section should show how the Contractor’s environmental team fits into its overall organizational
structure. Responsibilities and professional qualifications of key personnel should be outlined.
11.2. Environmental management system
A full Environmental Management System shall exist at the time the Environmental Impact Statement
is submitted. The applicant has to demonstrate that it will be capable of managing appropriate relevant
environmental questions and outline the standards that will be considered and/or aligned with when
developing the system for the project.
11.3 Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
An Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan will be submitted as a separate document for the
Authority’s approval prior to the commencement of Exploitation activities. This section should provide
an overview of what the Plan would entail.
11.3.1 Mitigation and management
Summarize the Mitigation and management measures that will be taken, based on the impact
minimization and Mitigation analysis undertaken as part of the Environmental Impact Assessment, and
as described in the Environmental Impact Statement in Sections 7, 8, and 9.
11.3.3 Closure Plan
A Closure Plan will be submitted as a separate document for the Authority’s approval prior to the
commencement of Exploitation activities . However, this section should provide an overview of what
the Closure Plan will entail, including Decommissioning, continued monitoring and Rehabilitation
measures, if applicable.
11.4 Reporting
Outline how data collected at the mine site and Impact Area will meet reporting requirements and best
scientific practices outlined in Annex VII on the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan.
40

[Page 41]
11.4.1 Monitoring
Outline how [information and] the results of monitoring studies will be reported to the Authority, as well
as the frequency and format of data releases in accordance with the regulations and Standards and taking
into consideration Guidelines.
11.4.2 Incident reporting
Outline how Incidents will be reported and managed.
Section 13
13.1 Consultation methods
Provide a description of the nature and extent, participation and outcomes of consultation(s) that have
taken place with Stakeholders, and how their comments have been addressed in the Environmental
Impact Assessment. This will include the description of the mechanisms [and criteria] used to manage
the diversity of Stakeholders addressed and comments provided.
This includes describing the mechanism(s) used to consult with different groups and how this aligns
with the applicable Standards and Guidelines, also incorporating criteria for Preservation Reference
Zones and Impact Reference Zones.
13.2 Stakeholders
List Stakeholders that have been consulted and explain the process by which Stakeholders were
identified. This should include a brief description of the Stakeholders and a historic overview of any
previous activities conducted by the Stakeholders in The Area.
13.3 Public consultation and disclosure
Provide a description of the goals and consultation workshops/meetings that occurred prior to the
preparation of the report, including outlining any concerns and comments made by Stakeholders and
how these will be addressed, and, if not, describe the reasons for that decision.
13.4 Commission consultation
Summarize the Commission’s recommendations on the Scoping Report and proposed Terms of
Reference for the applicant’s Environmental Impact Assessment submitted to the Commission, and
justification for any deviation either from those submitted Terms of Reference, or from the
Commission’s recommendations.
13.5. Stakeholder [and coastal State] Consultation
Describe how comments received under Stakeholder consultation have been or will be taken into
account, or why they have not been taken into account, and the reasons for that decision. The summary
should be based on the detailed response of the applicant to each consulted party and be available for
review.
13.4 Continuing consultation and disclosure
Outline any further consultation with Stakeholders that has been deemed necessary and is being planned.
41

[Page 42]
Section 14
Including the decision-makers and Stakeholders, have a clear understanding of the intention behind the
use of certain terms in the Environmental Impact Statement. The glossary should be included in the table
of contents for the Environmental Impact Statement and referenced in the introduction section.
Section 15
If independent scientists or other experts were involved in any of the work, they should be listed. [] The
names, current and validated contact information, occupational qualifications and their role in the
generation of the Environmental Impact Statement of such people should also be included. A statement
that those individuals so named concur with the content of the report should be included. Any conflict
of interest must be identified, disclosed in detail in this section including the way it was and continues
to be managed.
Moved from:
Annex VI, A, paras 2 and 3
The revised draft text of the President (ISBA/28/C/WOW/CRP.2) – Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
Standard and Guidelines on Health and Safety Plan
The text:
2. The Health and Safety Plan must contain, as a minimum:
(a) Requirements regarding minimum age and medical fitness for all personnel working and living on a
vessel or installation;
(b) Requirements for the competency and training, including mandatory safety training, for all personnel
working and living on a vessel or installation;
(c) A description of the measures taken to ensure that the vessel or installation is appropriately and
sufficiently staffed in order to ensure that the vessel or installation is operated safely, efficiently and
with due regard to security under all conditions;
(d) Information about the number and positions of all personnel working or living and working on a
vessel or installation;
(e) Details of shore-based management providing assistance to the vessel or installation, including the
designated person with responsibility and authority for monitoring the safety, health and security of
operations and with direct access to the highest level of management;
(f) Definitions of levels of authority and effective lines of communication between and among shore
staff and personnel on board vessels and installations;
(g) A description of the duties of the master and/or the person designated by the master to take
responsibility for the implementation of and compliance with the occupational safety and health plan;
(h) A description of an effective fatigue management strategy determining operational workload
requirements matching onboard manning levels and onshore support resources as well as work schedules
indicating the maximum hours of work or minimum hours of rest for all personnel living and working
on a vessel or installation;
42

[Page 43]
(i) Information about the medical care available on the vessel or installation and the communication and
response plans in the event that additional or onshore medical care is required;
(j) Arrangements and procedures for the safe transfer of personnel to and from or between vessels or
installations;
(k) A description of foreseeable occupational hazards, an assessment of their likelihood and
consequences, and associated preventative and control measures;
(l) Details regarding procedures for hazard identification and risk assessment on vessels or installations
and the preventive and protective measures adopted based on the outcomes of those procedures;
(m) Details of procedures, plans and instructions for key operations concerning the safety of the
personnel, vessels and installations;
(n) A description of the equipment and tools to be provided to ensure that all operations are conducted
in such a manner as to minimize any adverse effects on the occupational safety and health of personnel
to the extent necessary;
(o) Identification of critical equipment and technical systems that may result in hazardous situations;
(p) A description of crew accommodations and recreational facilities enabling and promoting the
personnel’s health and well-being, and information on their conformity to relevant rules, regulations and
standards;
(q) Details of procedures to ensure that the vessels or installations are maintained in conformity with the
provisions of the relevant rules and regulations and with any additional requirements that may be
established;
(r) Details of audit and review processes, and information on procedures for the implementation of
corrective action, including measures intended to prevent recurrence;
(s) Information on procedures ensuring that non-conformities, accidents and hazardous situations are
reported, investigated and analysed with the objective of improving safety and prevention;
(t) Details of the procedures for the communication of information between the company/owner/operator
and competent authorities and organizations, including the Authority;
(u) Details of the warning mechanisms intended to alert the Authority, together with the type of
information to be contained in the warning;
(v) Details regarding consultations with personnel on vessels or installations and, where appropriate, the
representative workers’ organizations, on the preparation and implementation of the vessel’s or
installation’s occupational safety and health policies and programmes and the procedures to ensure the
continuous improvement of the policies to take into account changes in practice and technology;
(w) The occupational safety and health policy and programme for each vessel or installation engaged in
activities in the Area; and
(x) Procedures for the periodic review of the plan and for its updating.
3. An occupational safety and health policy and programme for a vessel or installation engaged in
activities in the Area must contain the following to ensure a safety culture on board the vessel or
installation:
(a) An occupational health, safety and environmental awareness plan to inform all personnel engaged in
activities in the Area as to the occupational and environmental risks that may result from their work and
the manner in which such risks are to be dealt with;
(b) A plan for the communication of the occupational health, safety and environmental awareness plan;
(c) A training plan to establish a safety culture for occupational safety and health for the vessel or
installation, including mandatory personal safety training and specific task and equipment training,
including the labelling of safety-related equipment;
(d) The roles and responsibilities of:
43

[Page 44]
(i) Masters, officers or other personnel responsible for safety and health, including occupational safety
and health on a vessel or installation;
(ii) The vessel or installation safety committee;
(iii) The worker representative on the safety committee.
(e) Requirements, policies and training on the vessel or installation to address the following:
(i) Food and water safety;
(ii) Hygiene and sanitary facilities;
(iii) Measures to prevent disease and vermin;
(iv) Safety, and structural and design features of the vessel or installation, including means of access
and asbestos-related risks;
(v) Provision of personal protective equipment for personnel;
(vi) Machinery;
(vii) Ambient factors in the workplace and living accommodation on the vessel or installation, including
exposure to noise, vibration, lighting, ultraviolet light, non-ionizing radiation and extreme temperatures;
(viii) Air quality, ventilation and the effects of other ambient factors, including tobacco smoke;
(ix) Structural features of the vessels or installations and means of access, and materials;
(x) Special safety measures on and below deck on vessels and installations;
(xi) Loading and unloading of equipment;
(xii) Fire prevention and fire-fighting;
(xiii) Anchors, chains and lines;
(xiv) Dangerous cargo and ballast;
(xv) Work in enclosed spaces;
(xvi) Exposure to biological hazards;
(xvii) Exposure to radiological hazards;
(xviii) Exposure to chemicals;
(xix) Ergonomic hazards;
(xx) Physical and mental effects of fatigue;
(xxi) Effects of drug and alcohol dependency;
(xxii) Communicable diseases;
(xxiv) Emergency and accident response;
(xxv) Harassment and bullying;
(xxvi) Safety and occupational safety and health training of younger workers and trainees on the vessel
or installation;
(xxvii) Protection for lone and isolated workers;
(xxviii) Protection of women workers and workers from vulnerable groups;
(xxix) Measures regarding the safety, and occupational safety and health, of any temporary workers.
4. The occupational safety and health policy and programme must also address:
(b) Procedures for the investigation, reporting and follow-up to any safety or occupational safety and
health incidents, including occupational diseases;
(c) Protection of the privacy of personal and medical data of personnel.
44

[Page 45]
Moved from:
Annex VI, B, para 2
The revised draft text of the President (ISBA/28/C/WOW/CRP.2) – Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
Relevant standard and guidelines on Maritime Security Plan
The text:
2. The Maritime Security Plan must contain, as a minimum:
(a) Measures designed to prevent weapons, dangerous substances and devices that are intended for use
against persons, vessels, installations or ports, and whose carriage is not authorized, from being taken
on board the vessel or installation;
(b) An identification of the restricted areas, and measures for the prevention of unauthorized access to
them;
(c) Measures for the prevention of unauthorized access to the vessel or installation;
(d) Procedures for responding to security threats or breaches of security, including provisions for
maintaining critical operations of the vessel or installation, or vessel/port interface;
(e) Basic security measures for security level 1 (the level for which minimum appropriate protective
security measures shall be maintained at all times), both operational and physical, that will always be in
place;
(f) Additional security measures that will allow the vessel or installation to progress without delay to
security level 2 (the level for which appropriate additional protective security measures shall be
maintained for a period of time as a result of heightened risk of a security incident) and, when necessary,
to security level 3 (the level for which further specific protective security measures shall be maintained
for a limited period of time when a security incident is probable or imminent, although it may not be
possible to identify the specific target);
(g) Procedures for evacuation in case of security threats or breaches of security;
(h) Duties of personnel on board vessels and installations who are assigned security responsibilities, and
duties of other shipboard personnel relating to security aspects;
(i) Procedures for auditing the security activities;
(j) Procedures for training, drills and exercises associated with the plan;
(k) Procedures for interfacing with port facility security activities;
(l) Procedures for the periodic review of the plan and for its updating;
(m) Procedures for reporting security incidents;
(n) Identification of the vessel or installation security officer;
(o) Identification of the company security officer, including 24-hour contact details;
(p) Procedures to ensure the inspection, testing, calibration, and maintenance of any security equipment
provided on board;
(q) Frequency of testing or calibration of any security equipment provided on board;
45

[Page 46]
(r) Identification of the locations where the activation points of the vessel or installation security alert
system are provided (when activated, a ship security alert system automatically transmits a ship-to-shore
security alert to a competent authority,
(s) Procedures, instructions and guidance regarding the use of the vessel or installation security alert
system, including testing, activation, deactivation and resetting, and regarding the limitation of false
alerts.
(t) Cyber risks.
3. The Maritime Security Plan must establish that:
(a) All personnel on board vessels and installations have received security-related familiarization and
security-awareness training or instruction;
(b) Personnel on board vessels and installations with designated security duties have attended a training
course on those duties.
Moved from:
Annex X
Design Criteria for Impact Reference Zones and Preservation Reference Zones.
Revised Consolidated Text (ISBA/30/C/CRP.1) – Moved in November 2024
To be placed:
In the relevant Guidelines
The text:
3. To designate representative IRZs/PRZs requires characterisation of the pelagic and benthic environment
including all sub-habitats that may be impacted by mining operations, and determination of regional
distributions and patterns of connectivity of communities. Temporal variation must also be evaluated over
multiple years.
5. All types of impact identified in the Environmental Impact Statement, must correspond with IRZ/IRZs
which will enable the Contractor to monitor these impacts. Designation of multiple IRZs is possible for
this purpose.
12. Abiotic and biotic parameters, within the IRZ and PRZ will need to be monitored to quantify impacts.
This includes but is not limited to monitoring species diversity and function. To establish an adequate
baseline and to find suitable indicator species (e.g., the sensitive species that will suffer most from an
impact, key-stone species that are crucial for ecosystem processes, or species which abundance indicates
a disrupted ecosystem functioning), it will be necessary to catalogue most species in the IRZ and PRZ in
question and unravel their functions. This will require sufficient sampling effort to collect sample sizes
that allow for a meaningful comparison (i.e., with high statistical power).
13. The longevity of PRZs and duration of post-monitoring are important. The duration of post-mining
monitoring should last until monitoring results show a trajectory towards recovery. Post-mining
monitoring should be described in the final EMMP and/or Closure Plan no measurable difference between
IRZ and PRZ can be detected anymore.
13 Alt. Post mining monitoring shall continue until gecosystem function returns to the level of the pre-
mining condition agreed within the EMMP/Closure Plan and taking into account the time taken to reach a
new equilibrium state.
46

[Page 47]
15. To designate representative IRZs/PRZs requires characterisation of the pelagic and benthic
environment including all sub-habitats that may be impacted by mining operations, and determination of
regional distributions and patterns of connectivity of communities. Temporal variation must also be
evaluated over multiple years.
16. An applicant will need to be able to demonstrate knowledge of species’ ecological requirements (e.g.
for successful reproduction); an average population density alone will not suffice.
Moved from:
Reporting from the intersessional working group on stakeholder consultation
To be placed:
Suggestions on content for the standard and guidelines on stakeholder consultation
The text:
Guidelines will need to explain that such engagement should include meetings, workshops, webinars and
other forms of engagement necessary, and guidance on how to undertake such engagement.
Moved from:
Appendix II: Schedule of annual, administrative and other applicable fees
The revised draft text of the Co-Facilitators of the Informal Working Group on Institutional Matters
(ISBA/28/C/IWG/IM/CRP.2) - Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
Council decision on fees
The text:
Prescribed amount (United States dollars)
Annual fees
Submission of annual report (Regulation 84) [ ]
Application and other fees
Application for the approval of a Plan of Work (Regulation 7(3)(j)) [ ]
Renewal of an Exploitation Contract (Regulation 20) [ ]
Transfer of an interest in an Exploitation Contract and approved Plan of Work
(Regulation 23) [ ]
Use of a contract or approved Plan of Work as security (Regulation 22) [ ]
Temporary suspension in Commercial Production (Regulation 29) [ ]
Modification to a Plan of Work (Regulation 57) [ ]
Approval of a revised/Final Closure Plan (Regulations 59(2) and 60) [ ]
Approval of a revised Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan (Regulation
52(8)(b))
47

[Page 48]
[Other]
Moved from:
Appendix III: Monetary Penalties
The revised draft text of the Co-Facilitators of the Informal Working Group on Institutional Matters
(ISBA/28/C/IWG/IM/CRP.2) - Moved in February 2024.
To be placed:
Council decision on penalties
The text:
Penalty in respect of any under declaration or underpayment in respect of a royalty
Penalty in respect of any failure to deliver or furnish a royalty return
Penalty in respect of false royalty returns and information
Failure to submit an annual report according to Regulation 38
Other: to be considered e.g. relating to Notifiable Events (failure to notify); environmental & other
Incidents; not achieving/exceeding environmental thresholds. A desktop study should be performed in
connection with monetary penalties under comparable national regimes for extractive industries, including
those relating to a broader range of breaches of the environmental provisions and failure to adhere to the
Plan of Work annexed to an exploitation contract.
Moved from:
Appendix IV: Determination of a royalty liability
The third revised draft text of the Chair of the Open Ended Working Group on the Financial Terms of a
Contract (ISBA/28/C/OEWG/CRP.6) – Moved in February 2024.
For explanation boxes and comments please refer to the Chair’s text.
To be placed:
Relevant standard and guidelines on the royalty mechanism
The text:
In the present appendix:
Aggregate Relevant Metal Value means the aggregate of the Relevant Metal Values for each Relevant
Metal calculated in accordance with the applicable Standard.
Applicable Royalty Rate means the royalty rate set out in the applicable Standard, which may be by a
decision of the Council following any review under these regulations.
Average Listed Price means the average listed price for a Relevant Metal, calculated in accordance with
the applicable Standard.
Average Grade means the average metal content of the Relevant Metal calculated in accordance with the
applicable Standard.
48

[Page 49]
Relevant Metal means a metal contained in the mineral-bearing ore identified and determined in
accordance with the applicable Standard.
Relevant Metal Value(s) means the gross market value(s) of a Relevant Metal calculated in accordance
with the applicable Standard.
Valuation Point is the first point of transfer of the mineral-bearing ore by delivery onto a vessel
transporting the ore out of the Contract Area. In the instance where the transfer of mineral-bearing ore
onto another vessel does not take place, the valuation point shall be on board the original vessel before it
leaves the Contract Area.
1. The Authority shall set a royalty rate
The Authority shall set an Applicable Royalty Rate in respect of the royalty to be paid by the Contractor
to the Authority for Minerals which constitute polymetallic nodules, as set out in the applicable Standard
and taking into account the any Guidelines.
[1.bis. Additional Minerals
Additional Minerals shall be included in the calculation of the royalty should evidence become available
that such minerals are being profitably extracted.
The Commission shall recommend to the Council for decision whether additional Minerals shall be
included.
The inclusion of additional Minerals in the determination of the royalty shall constitute a review of rates
of payments as described in Regulation 82.]
2. Calculation of royalty payable
The royalty payable to the Authority for each royalty return period shall be [the product of the Applicable
Royalty Rate multiplied by the Aggregate Relevant Metal Value for that royalty return period] calculated
in accordance with the Standard and taking into account the Guidelines.
Moved from:
Enclosure III: Draft Standard on the Financial Terms of a Contract
The revised draft text of the Co-Facilitators of the Informal Working Group on Institutional Matters
(ISBA/28/C/IWG/IM/CRP.2) - Moved in February 2024.
For explanation boxes and comments please refer to the Chair’s text.
To be placed:
Standard on the Financial Terms of a Contract
The text:
In the present Standard:
First Period of Commercial Production means a period of 5 years following the date of commencement
of Commercial Production.
Listed Price means:
49

[Page 50]
1. For copper, nickel and cobalt: the price (in United States dollars), quoted for the Relevant Metal in the
Official Listing relating to that Relevant Metal for the relevant period.
2. For manganese: the price (in United States dollars), quoted for manganese ore in the applicable Official
Listing for the relevant period.
Official Listing means the quoted or published price of the Relevant Metals as specified for each Relevant
Metal in the Guidelines.
Second Period of Commercial Production means [a period of [x] years commencing on the day
following the last day of the First Period of Commercial Production.] [the period commencing on the day
following the last day of the First Period of Commercial Production.]
[Third Period of Commercial Production means the period commencing on the day following the last day
of the Second Period of Commercial Production.]
Shipment means each shipment of mineral-bearing ore by a vessel transporting the ore out of the
Contract Area.
Relevant Metals
1. For the purpose of polymetallic nodules and appendix IV, [during the First Period of Commercial
Production] Relevant Metals will be copper, nickel, cobalt and manganese [only].
[2. During the Second Period of Commercial Production and subsequent periods of Commercial
Production relevant metals will include copper, nickel, cobalt and manganese and may include other metals
and substances, but only if there is substantial evidence that such other metals and substances are being
processed from mineral-ore mined under the Exploitation Contract and are substantially increasing the
value of polymetallic nodules mined in the area and in such case additional Standards will be published
providing for the inclusion of these other metals and substances in aggregate relevant metal value.]
Calculation of Average Grade
1. In respect of each Relevant Metal, the Average Grade shall be the metal content of that Relevant Metal
expressed as a percentage per dry metric ton of mineral-bearing ore in a Shipment.
2. The metal content of each Relevant Metal shall be determined based on samples of the mineral bearing
ore collected at the Valuation Point in accordance with the sampling and assaying procedures set out in
the Standards and any Guidelines.
Calculation of Average Listed Price
The Average Listed Price for a Relevant Metal shall be the Listed Price for the Relevant Metal for the
month during which loading of that Shipment commenced.
Calculation of Relevant Metal Value and Aggregate Relevant Metal Value
1. The value of the mineral-bearing ore for a royalty return period shall be the Aggregate Relevant Metal
Value for that period.
2. The Aggregate Relevant Metal Value for a royalty return period shall be the aggregate of the Relevant
Metal Values for each of the Relevant Metals for that period.
3.The Relevant Metal Value for each Relevant Metal during the royalty return period shall be calculated
as follows:
50

[Page 51]
(a) For each Shipment: Quantity x Average Grade of the Relevant Metal x Average Listed Price for the
Relevant Metal
(b) For the royalty return period: the aggregate of the Relevant Metal Values for each Shipment [which
commenced loading] in the royalty return period
Where:
(i) Quantity means the quantity (in dry metric tons) of the mineral-bearing ore in each Shipment
[which commenced loading] in a royalty return period and calculated in the light of the applicable
Guidelines.
(ii) Average Grade is calculated in accordance with this Standard and in the light of the applicable
Guidelines.
(iii) Average Listed Price is calculated in accordance with this Standard and in the light of the
applicable Guidelines.
Determination of the Applicable Royalty Rate
The Applicable Royalty Rate shall be:
1. For the First Period of Commercial Production, [2 3 %]; and
[1. Alt. For the First Period of Commercial Production, [12%]; and]
2. [For][From] the Second Period of Commercial Production, a rate no less than [5 7.5 %] and no greater
than [9 12.5 %] determined by reference to the table below and the Notional Relevant Metal Value:
[2. Alt. [For][From] the Second Period of Commercial Production, a rate no less than [12%] and no
greater than [25%] determined by reference to the table below and the Notional Relevant Metal Value:]
Where:
(a) Notional Relevant Metal Value means the [average Aggregate Relevant Metal Value per dry
metric ton across all Shipments during the royalty return period].
(b) The [average Aggregate Relevant Metal Value per dry metric ton across all Shipments during
the royalty return period] shall be calculated by dividing the Aggregate Relevant Metal Value
for that royalty return period by the total Quantity shipped during that royalty return period.
Notional Relevant Metal Value
Applicable Royalty Rate
[for][from] Second Period of
[(as may be adjusted in accordance with the Standards and
Commercial Production
Guidelines)]
Less than [US$850] [US$ 510] per dry metric ton ( x < [US$850/t]
[5 7.5 %] [alt [12%]]
[US$ 510/t])
Greater than or equal to [US$850] [US$ 510] per dry metric ton but
less than [US$925] [US$ 580] per dry metric ton ([US$850/t] [6 8.75 %] [alt [15.3%]]
[US510 X/t] ≤ x < [US$925/t] [US$ 580/t])
Greater than or equal to [US$925] [US$ 580] per dry metric ton but
[7 10 %]
less than [US$1,000] [US$ 650] per dry metric ton ([US$925/t]
[alt [18.5%]]
[US$ 580/t] ≤ x < [US$1,000/t] [US$ 650/t])
Greater than or equal to [US$1,000] [US$ 650] per dry metric ton
and less than [US$1,075] [US$ 720] per dry metric ton [8 11.25 %] [alt [21.8%]]
([US$1,000/t] [US$ 650/t] ≤ x < [US$1,075/t] [US$ 720/t])
Greater than or equal to [US$1,075] [US$ 720] per dry metric ton
[9 12.5 %] [alt [25%]]
([US$1,075/t] [US$ 720/t] ≤ x)
51

[Page 52]
[Commercial Production
1. Commercial Production shall commence on the date that recovery, for commercial purposes, of Minerals
from the relevant Mining Area has reached at least [60%] of the design capacity outlined in the initial
production phase of the Mining Work Plan for that Mining Area for [90] consecutive Days.
2. Recovery, for the purposes of Commercial Production, shall take place at the point at which Minerals
from the Mining Area are transferred to a vessel directly following collection or removal from the seabed
and ocean floor and subsoil thereof.
3. Once the Contractor determines that it is engaging in sustained large-scale recovery operations meet the
criteria for the commencement of Commercial Production as set out in paragraph 1 above, which yield a
quantity of materials in excess of the thresholds specified in the Standards, the Contractor shall promptly
notify the Secretary-General of the proposed date of commencement of Commercial Production together
with supporting documentation and other evidence as specified in the Standards.
4. The Secretary-General shall transmit the notification and supporting documentation and evidence to the
Commission, which shall consider the proposal and supporting materials and approve or reject the
Contractor’s proposed date.
5. Promptly following approval or rejection by the Commission, the Secretary-General shall, as applicable,
confirm the date of commencement of Commercial Production to the Contractor, or notify the Contractor
of the rejection and invite the Contractor to re-submit its proposed date of commencement of Commercial
Production.
6. Upon confirmation, the Secretary-General shall notify members of the Authority, in particular coastal
states [in close proximity] [adjacent] to the [Mining Area][Contract Area], that Commercial Production
has commenced and the location of the Mining Area(s).
7. The date of commencement of Commercial Production, will be the date confirmed to the Contractor
according to paragraph 5.
8. If the Authority [or Inspectorate] has reasonable grounds to believe that the Contractor’s recovery rate
does not achieve the level defined in their Plan of Work within [6 months] of the start of recovery
operations, the Contractor shall be required to modify its Plan of Work in accordance with Regulation 57.
9. The Contractor shall submit any additional information requested by the Authority [or Inspectorate]
within [30] Days of any such request by the Authority.]
[Methodology for the review of Rates of Payments
1. In line with common practice in cross-country comparisons of fiscal regimes imposed on land-based
Exploitation activities, the Commission, when undertaking a review pursuant to this Standard, will use
average Effective Tax Rate (AETR) to make comparisons between the rates of payments for deep-sea
mining operations and land-based mining operations exploiting similar minerals.
2. In addition, the Commission will draw on established methodology routinely used by
intergovernmental organizations conducting such comparisons – for example, the International Monetary
Fund’s Fiscal Analysis of Resource Industries (FARI) Methodology (see FARI Technical Notes &
Manual, 2016).
EFFECTIVE TAX RATE EFFECTIVE TAX RATE
Mining in the Area within Land-based mining
of deepsea minerals range of same or similar minerals
GovRev
ISA Royalty + GovRev Pre-tax net cashflows
Pre-tax net cashflows GovRev is all payments to government
composed of royalty, income tax, resource
rent tax, withholding taxes, and so on, as
specified by the fiscal regime.
52

[Page 53]
Source: IMF Technical Note on FARI
Methodology, 2016
3. The Commission will use the following information when conducting a review pursuant to this
Standard:
(a) Pre-tax net cashflows for a typical deep sea mining project;
(b) Authority and government revenue from deep-sea mining operations; and
(c) Government revenue from land-based mining operations exploiting the same or similar minerals.
Pre-tax net cashflows for a typical deep-sea mining project
4. The ISA Financial Model will be updated based on best available pre-tax net cashflows data for the
five years preceding the most recent review of rates of payments.
5. The data referenced in paragraph 4 above will include prefeasibility studies submitted by Contractors
as part of their Exploitation Contract application, feasibility studies submitted 12 months before the
commencement of Commercial Production and any annual reporting required during Commercial
Production.
Authority and government revenue from deep-sea mining operations
6. Along with royalty payments to the Authority, the Commission shall review the fiscal regimes of
governments who either already generate revenue from Commercial Production undertaken by
Contractor(s) in the Area or those governments who could generate such revenue in the future if
Contractor(s) with existing Exploration contracts were to proceed with Commercial Production. For the
purpose of information covered under this paragraph, the Commission will use the median rate of
government revenue as the appropriate metric.
Government revenue from land-based mining operations exploiting the same or similar minerals
7. The Commission shall review the fiscal regimes of land-based mining jurisdictions that have accounted
for at least 80% of global (excluding seabed mining) production of the same or similar minerals during the
preceding five years. For example, when reviewing rates of payment for Contractors who exploit
polymetallic nodules, the Commission will review land-based mining jurisdictions accounting for at least
80% of global (excluding seabed mining) nickel, copper, manganese, and cobalt mining production during
the preceding five years. For the purpose of the information covered under this paragraph, the Commission
will use the median rate of government revenue as the appropriate metric.
8. Subject to the review conducted pursuant to these Standards, if the AETR for mining in the Area is
determined to differ from the AETR for land-based mining exploiting the same or similar minerals, the
Commission shall propose a recommendation for consideration by the Council to adjust the rates of
payments with a view to bringing the AETR for Contractors within the range of AETR for land-based
mining operations exploiting the same or similar minerals.]
Moved from:
Proposal from the intersessional working group on a review of payment mechanism.
To be placed:
Proposed Standard on the review of the financial terms of a Contract.
The text:
53

[Page 54]
Review of the system of payments and the rates of payments (Regulation 81 and 82)
Introduction and Guiding Principles
1. The purpose of the review of the system of payments and the rates of payments is to ensure that
the financial needs and objectives of the Authority are being fulfilled. The review process shall
be governed by the provisions of the Convention, the Agreement, relevant international standards,
and Good Industry Practice in extractives sector taxation. Specifically, Section 8 of the Annex to
the Agreement sets out the following principles:
(a) ‘The system of payments to the Authority shall be fair both to the contractor and to the
Authority and shall provide adequate means of determining compliance by the contractor with
such system [Paragraph 1(a), Section 8 of the Annex to the Implementation Agreement];
(b) ‘The rates of payments under the system shall be within the range of those prevailing in respect
of land-based mining of the same or similar minerals in order to avoid giving deep seabed miners
an artificial competitive advantage or imposing on them a competitive disadvantage [Paragraph
1(b), Section 8 of the Annex to the Implementation Agreement];
(c) ‘The system should not be complicated and should not impose major administrative costs on
the Authority or on a contractor. Consideration should be given to the adoption of a royalty system
or a combination of a royalty and profit-sharing system. If alternative systems are decided upon,
the contractor has the right to choose the system applicable to its contract. Any subsequent change
in choice between alternative systems, however, shall be made by agreement between the
Authority and the contractor;’ [Paragraphs 1(c), Section 8 of the Annex to the Implementation
Agreement]
Additionally, Article 13 of Annex III to the Convention sets out the following guiding objectives
for the Authority:
(a) ‘to ensure optimum revenues for the Authority from the proceeds of commercial production
[Convention, Annex III, Article 13.1(a).],
(b) ‘to attract investments and technology to the exploration and exploitation of the Area,
[Convention, Annex III, Article 13.1(b).] and
(c) to ensure equality of financial treatment and comparable financial obligations for contractors’
[Convention, Annex III, Article 13.1(c)].
Any recommendation to adopt a new or revised system of payment or changes in the rates of
payments must clearly demonstrate that the change will result in a payment regime that is
significantly better at meeting the principles set forth under Article 13 of Annex III to the
Convention and Section 8 of the Agreement.
Review Process
2. The Council shall regularly review both the system of payments and the rates of payments
following the Commencement of Commercial Production in the Area.
3. The Council shall establish and regularly update a schedule for the review of the system of
payments and the rates of payments following the commencement of Commercial Production in
the Area.
4. The Secretary General shall ensure that the schedule referenced in paragraph 3 above is made
publicly available.
5. Any review of the system of payments and rates of payments conducted pursuant to this
Standard shall be completed within 12 months, unless otherwise decided by the Council.
6. The Council shall initiate the first review of the system of payments and the rates of payment
on the five-year anniversary of the start of the first royalty period [i.e., January 1st or July 1st]
54

[Page 55]
corresponding to the first instance of commencement of Commercial Production in the Area. An
illustrative example for a scenario is included in Figure 1 below.
Figure 1: Example of a scenario with two Contractors entering Commercial Production at different
times.
7. Subsequent reviews of the system of payments and rates of payments shall be initiated on a
regular basis every five years following the conclusion of the 12 month period allocated for the
previous review under paragraph 5.
8. Based on the review schedule, the Council shall ensure that adequate funds are allocated from
the Authority’s budget to undertake an effective and thorough review of the system of payments
and rates of payments.
9. The Council shall task the Commission with preparing terms of reference for a review. The
Council shall review and approve the terms of reference for the review at a Council meeting prior
to the official scheduled initiation of the review process.
10. During a review, there should be a presumption that rates of payment and system of payments
should not change unless there is evidence that rates currently in force have been set too high or
too low, or that the system of payments is not performing as anticipated. Furthermore, any
proposed change to the rates of payments and system of payments shall be material in nature and
not an represent an administrative nuisance [e.g., change in rate of less than [#] percentage point
should not be recommended].
11.The Commission will be responsible for:
(a) Undertaking the review
(b) Engaging third-party experts
(c) Ensuring consultations with relevant stakeholders, including Contractors, Sponsoring States,
Member States eligible for a seat on Group C of the Council, the Enterprise, and the Economic
Planning Commission (once established).
(d) Providing the Council with recommendations, in accordance with the established timeframe
set out in paragraph 7, on whether any adjustments are warranted along with a supporting rationale.
12. The Council shall consider the recommendations of the Commission and shall decide whether:
(a) to adjust the rates of payments and what the magnitude shall be for such adjustments; and
(b) to adjust the existing system of payments or introduce a new system of payments.
13. Should the Council decide to adjust the rates of payments or the system of payments, such
adjustment shall:
(a) take effect from the beginning of the first royalty period following the Council’s decision under
paragraph 12 [i.e., January 1st or July 1st];
(b) apply to all future Contract Areas and all Contract Areas where the first five years of
55

[Page 56]
Commercial Production have elapsed by the time that the adjustment takes effect.
14. Should the Council decide to adjust the system of payment, such adjustment would require
written consent from current Contractors and shall:
(a) Take effect from the beginning of the first royalty period following the Council’s decision
under paragraph 12 (i.e., January 1st or July 1st); and
(b) Apply to all future Contract Areas and all Contract Areas where the first five years of
Commercial Production have elapsed by the time that the adjustment takes effect.
Moved from:
Proposal from the intersessional working group on a payment review mechanism
To be placed:
Standard on the methodology for the Review of Rates of Payments (Regulation 82)
The text:
1. In line with common practice in cross-country comparisons of fiscal regimes imposed on land-based
mining operations, the Commission, when undertaking a review pursuant to this Standard, will use the
average Effective Tax Rate (AETR) over the life of the mine to make comparisons between the rates of
payments for deep-sea mining operations and land-based mining operations exploiting similar minerals.
2. In addition, the Commission will draw on established methodology routinely used by intergovernmental
organizations conducting such comparisons – for example, the International Monetary Fund’s Fiscal
Analysis of Resource Industries (FARI) Methodology (see FARI Technical Notes & Manual, 2016).
3. The Commission will use the following information when conducting a review pursuant to this
Standard:
(a) Pre-tax net cashflows from the ISA Financial Model for a typical deep sea mining project
(b) ISA and sponsoring state revenue from deep-sea mining operations, and forecasted ISA and sponsoring
state revenue over the remaining years of the mine’s life.
(c) Royalties, royalty rates, taxes and tax rates from land-based mining jurisdictions and the effective tax
rate these result in when applied to the pre-tax net cashflows from the ISA financial model of a deep-sea
mine.
Pre-tax net cashflows for a typical deep-sea mining project
4. The ISA Financial Model will be updated based on best available pre-tax net cashflows data for the five
years preceding the most recent review of rates of payments.
5. The data referenced in paragraph 4 above will include prefeasibility studies submitted by Contractors
as part of their Exploitation Contract application, feasibility studies submitted 12 months before the
56

[Page 57]
Commencement of Commercial Production and any annual reporting required during Commercial
Production.
ISA and government revenue from deep-sea mining operations
6. Along with royalty and other payments to the Authority, the Commission shall review the fiscal regimes
of sponsoring states as they are applied to the taxation of mining in the area. This will include sponsoring
states whose contractors have already entered commercial production and the sponsoring states of those
contractors who may enter commercial production in the next five years.
Government revenue from land-based mining operations exploiting the same or similar minerals
7. The Commission shall review the fiscal regimes of land-based mining jurisdictions that have accounted
for at least 80% of global (excluding seabed mining) production of the same or similar minerals during the
preceding five years. For example, when reviewing rates of payment for Contractors who exploit
polymetallic nodules, the Commission will review land-based mining jurisdictions accounting for at least
80% of global (excluding seabed mining) nickel, copper, manganese, and cobalt mining production during
the preceding five years.
8. Subject to the review conducted pursuant to these Standards, if the AETR for mining in the Area is
determined to differ from the AETR for land-based mining exploiting the same or similar minerals, the
Commission shall propose a recommendation for consideration by the Council to adjust the rates of
payments with a view to bringing the AETR for Contractors within the range of AETR for land-based
mining operations exploiting the same or similar minerals.
Moved from:
Enclosure IV: Draft Guidelines in accordance with Regulations 95 in respect of the administration and
management of royalties prescribed in Part VII
The revised draft text of the Co-Facilitators of the Informal Working Group on Institutional Matters
(ISBA/28/C/IWG/IM/CRP.2) - Moved in February 2024.
For explanation boxes and comments please refer to the Chair’s text.
To be placed:
In Guidelines in accordance with Regulations 95 in respect of the administration and management of
royalties prescribed in Part VII
The text:
Official Listings
1. Official Listing in respect of copper means [appropriate reference to be determined].
2. Official Listing in respect of nickel means [appropriate reference to be determined].
3. Official Listing in respect of cobalt means [appropriate reference to be determined].
4. Official Listing in respect of manganese: [appropriate reference to manganese ore to be determined].
Replacement of Official Listing
If:
1. any of the indices or publications listed as an Official Listing ceases to be published or determinable for
a period of [one month] and there are reasonable grounds on which to conclude that the index or publication
will continue not to be published on a consistent basis in future; or
57

[Page 58]
2. any of the indices or publications listed as an Official Listing does not, in the opinion of the [Council]
fairly and reasonably, whether due to persistent errors or omissions, a change in its methodology or for
any other reason, reflect the fair market price of the Relevant Metal,
then the [Council] may determine a replacement Official Listing for the Relevant Metal, which shall be:
(a) the price for the Relevant Metal quoted on a recognized international mineral exchange or market;
(b) the published price for the Relevant Metal in a publication recognized for quoting or publishing prices
of metals in an international market; or
(c) based on recommendations of the Commission [and following consultation with Contractors], a
formula determined by the Council.
Worked example of royalty calculation
The following provides a worked example of the calculation of the royalty in accordance with
Regulation 64, appendix IV, the applicable Standard and these applicable Guidelines. This is for
illustrative purposes only.
58

[Page 59]
Relevant Metal Value for Copper:
1. For each Shipment of copper:
Quantity x Average Grade of the Relevant Metal x Average Listed Price for the Relevant Metal
2. For the royalty return period:
The aggregate of the Relevant Metal Values for each Shipment which commenced loading in the royalty
return period
Therefore, assuming 3 Shipments:
59

[Page 60]
Relevant Metal Value for Nickel:
1. For each Shipment of nickel:
Quantity x Average Grade of the Relevant Metal x Average Listed Price for the Relevant Metal
2. For the royalty return period:
The aggregate of the Relevant Metal Values for each Shipment which commenced loading in the royalty
return period.
3. Therefore, assuming 3 Shipments:
Relevant Metal Value for Cobalt:
1. For each Shipment of cobalt:
Quantity x Average Grade of the Relevant Metal x Average Listed Price for the Relevant Metal
2. For the royalty return period:
The aggregate of the Relevant Metal Values for each Shipment which commenced loading in the royalty
return period
Therefore, assuming 3 Shipments:
Relevant Metal Value of Manganese:
1. For each Shipment of manganese:
Quantity x Average Grade of the Relevant Metal x Average Listed Price for the Relevant Metal
60

[Page 61]
2. For the royalty return period:
The aggregate of the Relevant Metal Values for each Shipment which commenced loading in the royalty
return period
3. Therefore, assuming 3 Shipments:
Moved from:
Schedule
To be placed:
Reinserted if needed
The text:
“Additional Royalty” means the additional royalty payable in accordance with
Regulations [64 bis] and [64 ter].
“Allowable Sponsoring State Tax” has the meaning given in Regulation [64 ter].
“Applicable Additional Royalty Rate” is the rate determined in the applicable Standard.
“Assumed CIT Rate” is the rate determined in the applicable Standard.
“Covered Taxes” has the meaning given to that term in the Pillar 2 Global Anti-Base Erosion Model
Rules published by the OECD from time to time.
“Ecosystem Approach” means a comprehensive, integrated [and interdisciplinary] approach to the
management of human activities based on the Best Available Scientific [Information]/[Evidence] and,
where available, relevant traditional knowledge of Indigenous Peoples and local communities that
accounts for marine ecosystems and their dynamics, to achieve ecosystems’ conservation and sustainable
use of, and the avoidance of interference with, the ecological balance of the Marine Environment.
[Alt. “Ecosystem Approach” means a comprehensive, integrated and interdisciplinary approach to the
management of human activities based on the Best Available Scientific Knowledge to balance ecological,
social and governance principles at appropriate temporal and spatial scales in a distinct geographical area
to achieve ecosystem conservation and sustainable resource use. Scientific knowledge and effective
monitoring are used to acknowledge connections, integrity and biodiversity within an ecosystem along
with its dynamic nature and associated uncertainties. The ecosystem-based approach recognizes coupled
socio-ecological systems, with stakeholders involved in an integrated and adaptive management process
where decisions reflect societal choice.]
61

[Page 62]
“Equalization Measure Audit” means an audit in respect of a Contractor carried out in accordance with
the relevant Standard and applicable Guidelines to determine whether the Contractor has any tax
exemptions or receives any Subsides from its Sponsoring State.
“Inclusion Criteria” means a substantial (but not necessarily the majority or primary) part of (i) its
business is connected to or associated with, and/or (ii) its revenues are derived from, mining, harvesting,
transporting, processing and/or sale of Minerals or Metals obtained under an Exploitation Contract.
“Income” has the meaning given to ‘GloBE Income’ in the Pillar 2 Global Anti-Base Erosion Model
Rules published by the OECD [from time to time].
“Large Scale Production” means exploitation, production or removal from the Area of Mineral-bearing
ore in a quantity which is in excess of the thresholds specified in the Standards.
62