[Page 1]
ISBA
International Seabed Authority /27/C/8
Council
Distr.: General
31 January 2022
Original: English
Twenty-seventh session
Council session, part I
Kingston, 21 March–1 April 2022
Item 11 of the provisional agenda*
Draft regulations on exploitation of mineral resources
in the Area
Draft guidelines on the tools and techniques for hazard
identification and risk assessments
Prepared by the Legal and Technical Commission
Contents
Page
I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
A. Purpose of the present Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
B. Format of the present Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
C. Use of the present Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
II. General principles of Hazard identification and Risk assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
A. Key principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
B. Approaches to Risk assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
C. The importance of Stakeholder consultation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
III. Risk assessment process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
A. Establishing context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
B. Hazard identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
C. Risk analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
D. Risk evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
E. Risk treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
F. Monitoring and review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
G. Risk communication process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
* ISBA/27/C/L.1.
21-17333 (E) 280122
*2117333*

[Page 2]
ISBA/27/C/8
H. Recording and reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
I. Risk assessment tools and techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
IV. Best practice in Risk Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
V. Abbreviations, acronyms and definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
VI. Information sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
A. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
B. Useful links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2/27 21-17333

[Page 3]
ISBA/27/C/8
I. Introduction
1. The present Guidelines have been developed to provide practical and technical
guidance on the tools and methodologies for identifying Hazards and assessing Risks
associated with the Exploitation of Mineral Resources in the Area and are generally
applicable to numerous parts of the Exploitation Regulations.
2. Given the uncertainties inherent in mineral Exploitation in the Area, a rigorous
Risk Management strategy is necessary at every phase of the project. Therefore, the
Risk Management process is to be incorporated into various components of a
Contractor’s application for a Plan of Work for Exploitation, including the HSP, the
Closure Plan, the EIA, the EMMP and the ERCP. It is also to be incorporated into
day-to-day Exploitation activities, including the management and operation of mining
support vessels and Installations.
A. Purpose of the present Guidelines
3. The purpose of the present Guidelines is to provide information on approaches
and tools for Hazard identification and Risk assessment. The intent is to “reduce the
risk of Incidents as much as reasonably practicable, to the point where the cost of
further risk reduction would be grossly disproportionate to the benefits of such
reduction”.
4. The guidance below is not intended to be prescriptive; the aim is to provide
sufficient direction to enable Contractors to formulate an approach to the
implementation of Risk Management strategies through the use of Hazard
identification and Risk assessment tools. The guidance contained below is intended
as a reasonably comprehensive starting point from which a practical and appropriate
Hazard identification and Risk assessment can be developed within a process that
involves rigorous Stakeholder engagement. The present Guidelines are also intended
for users and reviewers (including a wide range of Stakeholders) of the following
Plan of Work components: HSP, Closure Plan, EIA, EMMP and ERCP.
5. Hazard identification and Risk assessment activities should inform methods to
reduce the Risk of Incidents and impacts of Exploitation on the Marine Environment
as much as reasonably practicable and should:
(a) Serve to establish the necessary Risk assessment and Risk Management
systems to effectively implement the proposed Plan of Work in accordance with Good
Industry Practice, Best Available Techniques, Best Environmental Practices and the
regulations, including the technology and procedures to meet health, safety and
environmental requirements for the activities proposed in the Plan of Work;
(b) Provide a basis for EIA and EIS;
(c) Provide for the protection of human life and safety.
B. Format of the present Guidelines
6. The present Guidelines consist of the following sections:
• Section I contains details concerning the purpose and scope of the Guidelines
and provides the Contractor with information on the organization of the
Guidelines and the ways in which they are linked to the regulations and other
Guidelines.
21-17333 3/27

[Page 4]
ISBA/27/C/8
• Section II contains details concerning the key principles of Hazard identification
and Risk assessment, triggers for and timing of the Risk Management process,
and a discussion of pertinent Stakeholders.
• Section III contains details concerning the Risk assessment process, specifically
establishing the context, Hazard identification, Risk analysis, Risk evaluation,
and Risk treatment, monitoring, review and communication. In addition, a
summary of potential Risk assessment tools and techniques is provided.
• Section IV contains a summary of the best practices associated with the Risk
assessment and Risk Management process.
• Section V contains a list of abbreviations and definitions of terms used
throughout the present Guidelines.
• Section VI contains references and links to additional sources of information
useful in Hazard identification and Risk assessment.
C. Use of the present Guidelines
7. The present Guidelines should be read in conjunction with the Exploitation
Regulations, the relevant Exploration Regulations and other Standards and Guidelines
of the Authority.
8. The appropriate REMP should also be considered by the Contractor in that it
may affect more regional Hazards and Risk elements.
9. Additional resources can be found in section VI of the present Guidelines.
Overarching guidance documents for all industries include ISO standard 31000:2018
(Risk management: guidelines), IEC standard 31010:2019 (Risk management: risk
assessment techniques) and ISO standard 9000:2015 (Quality management:
fundamentals and vocabulary). There are numerous guidance documents issued by
national jurisdictions and related industries that can provide valuable and relevant
approaches to performing Hazard identification and Risk assessment.
II. General principles of Hazard identification and
Risk assessment
A. Key principles
10. Two of the fundamental policies and principles of the Exploitation Regulations
are to provide for “the effective protection of the Marine Environment from the
harmful effects which may arise from Exploitation and to provide for the protection
of human life and safety”.
11. All activities associated with the Exploitation of Minerals in the Area inherently
involve some level of potential Risk to the environment and/or the health and safety
of the personnel engaged to perform such activities. Hazard identification and Risk
assessment are critical elements used in the preparation of key Risk Management
documents (e.g., the EIA as documented in the EIS, the EMMP, the ERCP, the HSP
and others). In them, appropriate controls used by the Contractor are established to
reduce the potential for harm to both the environment and humans. The principles of
Risk Management are well established across a wide range of industries, and there is
a wealth of valuable guidance on the methodologies and tools associated with
transparent, systematic processes to review and control Risks, including an ISO
4/27 21-17333

[Page 5]
ISBA/27/C/8
standard on risk management (ISO 31000:2018), which can be applied to
Exploitation, in addition to many others.
B. Approaches to Risk assessment
12. Risk assessment is a part of Risk Management; it is a structured process to
identify how objectives may be affected and analyse the Risk in terms of
consequences and their probability before a decision is made on whether further
treatment is required. Risk assessment is an attempt to answer the following
fundamental questions:
(a) What can go wrong?
(b) How likely is it to go wrong ?
(c) What are the impacts?
(d) Is the level of Risk acceptable or does it require Mitigation?
13. As shown in figure 1 below, the following elements form the pillars of Risk
assessment (i.e. identifying, analysing, assessing and communicating Risks):
(a) Establishing context;
(b) Hazard identification;
(c) Risk analysis (frequency and consequence assessment);
(d) Risk evaluation (risk representation);
(e) Risk treatment;
(f) Monitoring and reviews;
(g) Communication and consultation.
21-17333 5/27

[Page 6]
ISBA/27/C/8
Figure 1
Overview of the Risk assessment process within the context of the Risk
Management process
Source: Adapted from ISO/IEC standard 31010:2019.
C. The importance of Stakeholder consultation
14. Successful Risk assessment is dependent on effective communication and
consultation with Stakeholders. A robust and transparent process of performing
Hazard identification and Risk assessment activities will be critical to the review and
acceptance of management documents generated as a result. These Stakeholders
include, but are not limited to:
(a) Member States;
(b) Sponsoring State(s);
(c) Other relevant Authority Contractors;
(d) Authority observers;
(e) Scientific community;
(f) Environmental (non-governmental organization) community;
(g) Industry Stakeholders (e.g. suppliers, subcontractors, potential customers);
(h) Other entities, as appropriate.
6/27 21-17333

[Page 7]
ISBA/27/C/8
III. Risk assessment process
15. Hazard identification and Risk assessment fits within a larger process that
ensures that the Plan of Work meets the objectives outlined above in section II.A,
throughout the entire life cycle of the project. The other Standards and Guidelines
listed in section I.C, are intrinsically linked with the Risk assessment and Risk
Management process, and the Contractor should review the applicable Guidelines
regarding those plans when performing the Hazard identification and Risk
assessment.
16. Table 1 contains a brief summary of the Risk assessment components
accompanying each phase of the project life cycle, as well as the associated reporting
requirements to the Authority.
Table 1
Risk assessment components
Project phase Phase-specific Risk assessment characteristics Submission to the Authority
Pre-Feasibility Study and/or Broad review of potential Hazards and Results incorporated into the Mining
Feasibility Study Risks associated with the mineral Workplan included in the application
deposit and proposed Exploitation, in for approval of a Plan of Work
which all geological, engineering, submitted to the Authority under
legal, operating, economic, social, regulation 7 of the Exploitation
environmental and other relevant Regulations
factors are considered
Design of a detailed Plan of – Establishment of Hazard Results incorporated into the following
Work identification and Risk assessment components of the application for
process; approval of a Plan of Work submitted
to the Authority under regulation 7 of
– Identification of Hazards and
the Exploitation Regulations, including
evaluation of Risks specifically
HSP, Closure Plan, EIA, EMMP and
associated with environmental
ERCP
impacts, health and safety, security
Risks, management and operation
of mining support vessels and
Installations, and closure associated
with the proposed Exploitation
Operations – Ongoing Risk assessment and new Annual reporting to the Authority
Hazard identification based on the under regulation 38 (1) of the
environmental and safety Exploitation Regulations throughout
monitoring results and the adaptive the duration of the contract
management process
– Modifications as needed to the HSP,
EMMP, and ERCP to ensure that
Mitigation and safety results are
acceptable
21-17333 7/27

[Page 8]
ISBA/27/C/8
Project phase Phase-specific Risk assessment characteristics Submission to the Authority
Closure – Risks relating to Environmental Closure Plan submitted to the Authority
Effects are to be quantified, under regulations 59 and 60 of the
assessed and managed, which Exploitation Regulations at least 12
includes the gathering of months prior to the planned end of
information relevant to closure or production
suspension of the Exploitation
– Evaluation of post-closure Hazards
and Risks and associated proposed
post-closure monitoring and
Mitigation measures
Post-closure monitoring Ongoing Risk assessment and new Final performance assessment report
Hazard identification based on the submitted at the cessation of post-
post-closure environmental monitoring closure monitoring activities to the
results and adaptive management Authority under regulation 61 of the
process Exploitation Regulations
A. Establishing context
17. Establishing the context informs the rest of the Risk assessment process,
including the definition of Risk assessment objectives and Risk criteria, and the
identification of appropriate Risk assessment tools and techniques. For a specific Risk
assessment, (e.g. the ERA in the case of an EIS/EMMP/ERCP, or health and safety
Risk assessment in the case of the HSP/ERCP), establishing the context should
include the following:
(a) Establishing the external context with respect to the environment in which
the system (i.e. the Exploitation) operates, including:
(i) Physicochemical, biological, social, cultural, political, legal, regulatory
and economic factors, whether international, national, regional or local;
(ii) Perceptions and values of external Stakeholders;
(b) Establishing the internal context with respect to:
(i) Capabilities of the Contractor organization in terms of resources and knowledge;
(ii) Internal Stakeholders and policies;
(iii) Internal structures (e.g. governance, roles and accountability);
(c) Establishing the context of the Risk Management process;
(d) Defining Risk criteria involves deciding on the following:
(i) The nature and types of consequences to be included and how those will
be measured;
(ii) The way in which probabilities are to be expressed;
(iii) The way in which a level of Risk will be determined;
(iv) The criteria by which it will be decided when a Risk needs treatment;
(v) The criteria for deciding when a Risk is acceptable and/or tolerable;
(vi) Whether and how combinations of Risks will be taken into account.
8/27 21-17333

[Page 9]
ISBA/27/C/8
18. One particular aspect of deep seabed Exploitation that complicates the
assessment of environmental impacts is that there is a lack of scientific certainty
associated with deep-sea species and ecosystems. A Precautionary Approach is
therefore required, as indicated by regulation 2 (e) (ii) of the Exploitation
Regulations. There are fewer uncertainties with regard to the evaluation of health and
safety Risks associated with surface vessels and Installations on the open ocean and
with operational machinery, as there are a number of existing and well-established
industries (e.g. offshore oil and gas drilling, land-based mining, dredging, deep-sea
fishing) that can be drawn upon to inform the Hazard identification and Risk
assessment processes necessary to protect human health and safety to adhere to reduce
Risks to a level considered consistent with the ALARP principle.
B. Hazard identification
19. Hazards are sources of potential harm; identifying them should be the first step
in the Risk analysis process. The Hazards associated with all aspects of the project
should be identified and understood before moving to the second step of identifying
the Risks for analysis. The Hazard identification process should be dynamic and
ongoing to ensure that any new Hazards are identified following changes in the Plan
of Work and throughout different phases of the project. This phase is critical in the
context of the Risk Management since an overlooked Hazard (hence Risk) cannot be
further assessed and controlled.
20. The Hazard identification process should include a review of all potential
Hazards that could result in consequences for personnel, surface vessels and the
environment during all phases of the project. There are a number of general categories
of potential Hazards associated with the activities proposed in the Plan of Work and
Mining Area that should be reviewed. Hazard categories and examples of aspects to
evaluate include, but are not limited to:
(a) Natural environment and ecosystem issues (i.e. Exploitation causing
changes in water composition or clarity, or noise affecting the food chain and
availability of prey; potential oxygen depletion; sediment plume effects on the
seafloor and water column; bioaccumulation of toxic metals and other contaminants,
among others);
(b) Pollution and hazardous substance issues (i.e. potential pollution from
vessels or equipment to the Marine Environment, potential for fire, explosions and
biological Hazards, among others);
(c) Occupational issues (e.g. Hazards present in the work environment,
potential for personnel issues and ergonomic problems, among others);
(d) Climatic and natural events (e.g. impacts of hurricanes, lightning and
wind, among others);
(e) Socioeconomic issues (e.g. potential identification of human remains of
an archaeological or historical nature, impacts on marine traffic, fisheries, and
traditional and other users of the Area).
21. Commonly used techniques to aid in Hazard identification include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(a) HAZID technique;
(b) Hazard review;
(c) What-if analysis;
(d) Checklist analysis;
21-17333 9/27

[Page 10]
ISBA/27/C/8
(e) HAZOP analysis;
(f) Failure modes and effects analysis.
22. Those techniques are described in further detail in ISO/IEC standard
31010:2019. Links to resources to assist with Hazard identification are provided in
section VI.B.
23. For existing and well-established technologies and industries, Hazard
identification can rely heavily on previous experience and studies and may require no
more than a simple identification technique to enumerate the Hazards. For example,
as noted in section III.A, for the evaluation of health and safety Hazards associated
with surface vessels and Installations on the open ocean and operational machinery,
use can be made of the well-established Risks in similar industries (offshore oil and
gas drilling, land-based mining, dredging and deep-sea fishing) as a guide. However,
for use of new technologies or work in ecosystems where there is a lack of full
scientific certainty (i.e. deep seabed Exploitation, and deep-sea species and
ecosystems), a more thorough analysis should be employed (such as the HAZOP
analysis) to gain sufficient confidence that all the Hazards have been identified.
C. Risk analysis
24. Risk analysis is the process of determining the consequences and their
probabilities for each identified Hazard or Risk event. The consequences and
probabilities for each Hazard are then combined to determine a level of Risk (see
sect. III.D). This process involves an assessment of (a) the frequency and probability
of the Hazard occurring and (b) the severity of the consequences associated with the
Hazard. This can be accomplished using both quantitative and qualitative methods.
25. The Risk assessment methodology applied should be efficient (cost-effective)
and sufficiently detailed to enable the ranking of the Risks for the subsequent
consideration of Risk reduction. The rigour of the assessment should be proportionate
to the complexity of the problem and the magnitude of the Risks. It is expected that
assessments would progress through the following stages (see figure 2):
(a) Qualitative, in which frequency and severity are determined purely
qualitatively;
(b) Semi-quantitative, in which frequency and severity are quantified
approximately, within ranges;
(c) Quantified Risk assessment, in which full quantification occurs.
26. These approaches to Risk assessment reflect a range of detail of assessment
from qualitative (lowest) to fully quantified (highest). The approach should be chosen
taking into account:
(a) The level of estimated Risk (and its proximity to the limits of tolerability);
(b) The complexity of the problem and/or the difficulty encountered in
answering the question whether more needs to be done to reduce the Risk.
10/27 21-17333

[Page 11]
ISBA/27/C/8
Figure 2
Proportionate Risk assessment
Abbreviations: Q, qualitative Risk assessment; SQ, semi-quantitative Risk assessment; QRA,
quantified Risk assessment.
27. The overall process from Hazard identification to determination of the Risk is
graphically represented in figure 3.
Figure 3
Overview of the Risk analysis process
Source: Adapted from Vamanu and others.
28. Choosing the appropriate Risk assessment approach or combination of
approaches is a key step in supporting the Risk Management process. Qualitative Risk
assessments are commonly based on experience or expertise and result in categorical
estimates of Risk. Quantitative Risk assessments involve the assignment of data-
supported numeric values in the assessment of probability and consequence. They
commonly follow an initial qualitative assessment focused on the highest-priority
Risks identified. Quantitative Risk assessments are more likely to be used to account
for the compounding of effects from multiple scenarios or events.
21-17333 11/27

[Page 12]
ISBA/27/C/8
29. Importantly, Risk assessments should be used to provide an input into the
decision-making process; those responsible for such decision-making should be
suitably qualified, experienced and of sufficient seniority to be competent and
accountable for their actions.
30. The lower levels of assessment (qualitative and semi-quantitative) are
considered most appropriate for screening for Hazards and events that need to be
analysed in greater detail, for example to assist in determining the events to be
included in the representative set for a more detailed assessment. One approach to
deciding the appropriate level of detail would be to start with a qualitative approach
and to opt for more detail whenever it becomes apparent that the current level is
unable to offer the following:
(a) The required understanding of the Risks;
(b) Discrimination between the Risks of different events;
(c) Assistance in deciding whether more needs to be done (making compliance
judgements).
31. Figure 4 below depicts a screening process to determine the appropriate Risk
assessment level.
Figure 4
Screening to determine appropriate Risk assessment level
Abbreviations: Q, qualitative Risk assessment; SQ, semi-quantitative Risk assessment; QRA,
quantified Risk assessment.
12/27 21-17333

[Page 13]
ISBA/27/C/8
32. Both qualitative and quantitative Risk assessments provide Contractors with the
knowledge required to properly control and communicate the Risk. Qualitative
assessments, which involve expert judgment, may be sufficient for many operations,
such as simple operations in which the level of Risk is dependent on fewer variables
and where uncertainties are relatively low. Quantitative assessments, however, can
offer additional insight if the operation or technology is more complex, decisions
regarding the effectiveness of Risk controls and potential consequences are dependent
on many variables, multiple paths to failure exist, the Risk is greater, or uncertainties
are greater. Ultimately, choosing the appropriate Risk assessment method is also
useful for the proper communication of Risk between the Contractor, the Authority
and other Stakeholders.
33. Risk estimation entails assessing both the severity (consequence) and frequency
(likelihood) of hazardous events. The amount of detail and effort required is
progressively greater for qualitative, semi-quantitative and quantified Risk
assessments. For the qualitative or semi-quantitative approaches, drawing up a Risk
matrix is a convenient method for ranking and presenting the results. It is important
that the Risk matrix used should be capable of discriminating between the Risks of
the different hazardous events for the installation.
34. Examples of quantitative and qualitative assessment methods are provided
below.
Procedures
35. Frequency/probability assessment procedures and consequence assessment
procedures are discussed below.
Frequency/probability assessment
36. The objective of a frequency/probability assessment is to provide a
characterization of Risk Hazards by likelihood of their occurrence by estimating how
likely a hazardous event is to occur, the range of outcomes from such an event and
the frequency of such outcomes. The three following general approaches are
commonly employed to estimate probability; they may be used individually or jointly:
(a) Use of relevant historical data;
(b) Probability forecasts using predictive techniques;
(c) Expert opinion used in a systematic and structured process.
37. During a frequency assessment, inductive or deductive analysis can be used to
determine the range of outcomes of an event. In inductive Hazard analysis, a bottom-
up technique is used to consider a Hazard event and its possible effects on the
operation in its entirety. Deductive Hazard analysis is a top-down technique used to
consider hypothetical situations in which an operation is failing in a certain way and
an attempt is made to determine the possible causes or contributing behaviours.
38. The level of detail resulting from a frequency assessment is dependent on the
stage of the project at which it is being evaluated; the further along the project is, the
more detail and data can potentially be included in the assessment. If a quantitative
approach to frequency assessment is not possible by using available data on the
project in question, the use of statistical data on the historical frequency of events
should be considered for the frequency assessment.
39. The results of the probability assessment can be used to assign a specific
probability category to each Risk, which can then be used in the Risk evaluation (see
sect. III.D). An example of a probability scale for environmental impacts and health
and safety impacts is presented in table 2.
21-17333 13/27

[Page 14]
ISBA/27/C/8
Table 2
Probability scale for environmental impacts and health and safety impacts
Probability of an Incident occurring
Category during the project period
Likely > 50%
Reasonably likely 10%–50%
Unlikely 1%–10%
Remote 0.1%–1%
Extremely remote < 0.1%
40. Examples of frequency assessment methods are provided below. Links to
resources to assist with Hazard identification are provided in section VI.B.
Consequence assessment
41. In consequence assessment, the level of the impact that could occur is evaluated,
as is the level of the impact of a hazardous event on personnel, surface vessels and
the environment. For example, consequences can include the accidental release of
material, a release of energy or the loss of onboard resources. An event may have a
range of impacts of different magnitudes and affect a range of objectives and
Stakeholders. The types of consequences to be analysed and the Stakeholders affected
are decided earlier, when the context is established (see sect. III.A).
42. Consequence analysis may involve the following:
(a) Taking into consideration existing controls to treat the consequences,
together with all relevant contributory factors that affect the consequences;
(b) Relating the consequences of the Risk to the original objectives;
(c) Considering both immediate consequences and those that may arise after
a certain time has elapsed, if consistent with the scope of the assessment;
(d) Considering secondary consequences, such as those having an impact on
associated systems, activities, equipment or organizations.
43. The activities employed in the consequence assessment phase may include the
following:
(a) Characterizing the material or energy associated with the Hazard being
analysed;
(b) Estimating (by means of models and correlations) the transport of the
material and/or the propagation of the energy in the environment to the target of
interest (people, structures and others);
(c) Identifying the effects of the propagation of energy or material on the
target of interest;
(d) Quantifying the health, safety, environmental or economic impacts
(depending on the target of interest).
44. Consequence modelling usually involves sophisticated computer programs
designed for specific tasks, most of which are intended for safety or environmental
purposes (e.g. fire, explosion overpressure, and smoke and gas dispersion modelling).
Such models can serve to predict the range, intensity, and mortality and morbidity
rates.
14/27 21-17333

[Page 15]
ISBA/27/C/8
45. The results of the probability assessment can be used to assign a specific
consequence category to each Risk, which can then be used in the Risk evaluation
(see sect. III.D). An example of a consequence scale for environmental impacts based
on water quality is presented in table 3.
Table 3
Consequence scale for environmental impacts based on water quality
Negative effects Description
No The Hazard is not expected to have any negative effects on water or
sediment quality. There are no expected negative effects on the
ecosystem (no chronic effects). This means that the water
concentration and/or sediment concentration is not expected to
exceed limit values for chronic effects on biota.
Low The Risk of negative effects on water or sediment quality is low. The
Risk of negative effects on the ecosystem is low (chronic effects).
This means that the water concentration and/or sediment
concentration is not expected to exceed limit values for chronic
effects on biota. Recovery is possible.
Considerable The Hazard has considerable negative effects on water or sediment
quality. The Hazard has considerable negative effects on the
ecosystem (chronic effects). This means that the water concentration
and/or sediment concentration is expected to exceed limit values for
chronic effects on biota. Only partial recovery in the long term
(more than 1,000 years) is possible.
Large The Hazard has large negative effects on water or sediment quality.
The Hazard has large negative effects on the ecosystem (chronic or
acute effects). This means that the water concentration and/or
sediment concentration is expected to exceed limit values for
chronic effects on biota. Only partial recovery from a long-term
perspective (more than 1,000 years) is possible.
Severe The Hazard has severe negative effects on water or sediment quality.
The Hazard has severe negative effects on the ecosystem (chronic or
acute effects). This means that the water concentration and/or
sediment concentration is expected to exceed limit values for
chronic effects on biota. Recovery is not possible.
46. Examples of consequence assessment methods are provided in section III.C.
Links to resources to assist with Hazard identification are provided in section VI.B.
Accounting for uncertainties
47. The Risk Management process is intended to support decision-making by taking
account of uncertainty and the possibility of future events or circumstances (intended
or unintended) and their effects on agreed objectives. The uncertainties associated
with the analysis of Risk are often considerable. An understanding of those
uncertainties is necessary to interpret and communicate Risk analysis results
effectively. Risk is identified and analysed using data, methods and models, and the
analysis of uncertainties associated with those plays an important part in their
application. Uncertainty analysis involves determining the variation or imprecision
in the results brought about by the collective variation in the parameters and
21-17333 15/27

[Page 16]
ISBA/27/C/8
assumptions used to define the results. An area closely related to uncertainty analysis
is sensitivity analysis. When making decisions as part of managing Risk, it is
important to remember that this is not an absolute science; it revolves around
managing uncertainty to achieve the objectives of protecting human health and the
Marine Environment.
48. By considering the uncertainty in data, analyses and interpretation, an
assessment can be made of where there are major gaps in understanding the impacts
of the proposed activities, which can help to direct further work to improve
knowledge and confidence.
49. Because deep seabed mining is a new industry associated with uncertainties, it
is important that the Precautionary Approach is applied to the management of
environmental Risk. The Precautionary Approach requires addressing and preventing
environmental Risks at early stages, even if uncertainties remain.
D. Risk evaluation
50. Evaluating Risk is a complex area in which, in the purest sense, the Risk level
is compared to predetermined acceptance criteria to facilitate decisions on treatment.
There are some instances in which this is applicable and the assessment results are
more absolute, showing which Risks are acceptable and which are not, so that clear
decisions can be made concerning the extent and nature of treatment and priorities.
The Exploitation Regulations do not list thresholds for environmental impacts
(EIA/EIS).
51. Until sufficient data on the Area exist and the Authority establishes EIA
thresholds and other Standards, Contactors could use project-specific and area-
specific impact thresholds based on data and analyses commensurate in quality with
the extent of the impact.
52. Once the Contractor has evaluated the Risk level, Risks should be ranked and
categorized according to their significance (low, moderate, or high Risk), which will
inform the level of Risk treatment required to achieve a level of Risk that is As Low
As Reasonably Practicable.
1. Risk representation
53. Risk representation is the term used to describe the act of combining the results
obtained though the Hazard identification and Risk assessment (frequency and
consequences) activities in an easy format to be communicated to Stakeholders and
used to inform the decision-making process. There are multiple methods of Risk
representation (e.g. Risk matrix, F-N curves, Risk profile, Risk isopleth, Risk index),
but the Risk matrix is the most frequently used Risk representation tool.
54. When considering Risk representation, the Contractor should choose a method
that meets the following criteria:
(a) Easy to apply;
(b) Easy to understand;
(c) Widely accepted (and thus, a useful Risk communication tool for
multidisciplinary teams);
(d) Allows Risks to people, environment, assets to be treated consistently;
(e) Allows prioritization of the Hazards.
16/27 21-17333

[Page 17]
ISBA/27/C/8
55. The Risk matrix is a way of graphically representing Risk. A Risk matrix has
two dimensions: consequence (also known as severity) and frequency (also known as
likelihood or probability). Within the space defined by these dimensions, the
following three areas are delimited (see also figure 5):
(a) A green area, corresponding to low probability and limited consequences;
(b) A yellow area, corresponding to medium probability and moderate
consequences;
(c) A red area, corresponding to high probability and extensive consequences.
Figure 5
Example of a Risk matrix structure
Source: Adapted from Vamanu and others.
56. Risk matrices are a consistent, concise way to communicate the level of Risk
that a Hazard presents, whether it relates to the environment or to health and safety.
Hence, a Risk matrix allows multi-disciplinary teams to rank the Risks in order of
significance, screen out the insignificant ones and evaluate the need for further Risk
reduction/prevention measures (i.e. Risk treatment) to be taken with regard to various
Hazards.
57. Figure 5 above is a very simple example of a Risk matrix; in practice there is a
wide range of forms for the layout, labelling, definition of severity and probability
terms. There are many methods in addition to the matrix format (see Standard and
Guidelines for the Environmental Impact Assessments Process and ISO standard
31000:2018), although the key to a successful Risk assessment involves evaluating
similar components, even if those are analysed using different methods and presented
in different ways. A number of examples have been provided for reference in
section III.C.
2. Cumulative Risk
58. One issue that is not addressed through the Risk matrix tool is cumulative Risk,
because the Risk matrix is used to evaluate one Hazard at a time. It is in the interest
of the Contractor to determine whether smaller Risks, if not addressed, can
accumulate and, together, become an unacceptable Risk.
21-17333 17/27

[Page 18]
ISBA/27/C/8
59. Cumulative Risk can be due to the aggregate effects of multiple Exploitation
operations in a region or the combination of different impacts resulting from a single
activity. Cumulative Risk is likely to be less obvious, as it is often subtle and spread
over time. The Exploitation Regulations contain a recommendation to consider
cumulative Risks in the EIS (and by extension, the EMMP) for their environmental
impacts. From a health and safety perspective, cumulative impacts may result from
personnel exposure to multiple stressors, (inhalation, repetitive motion and others).
The Exploitation Regulations include a duty to cooperate with the scientific
community, other Contractors, and the Authority in identifying gaps in scientific
knowledge regarding the Area and developing best practices that will improve
existing Standards and protocols. This will necessitate an iterative process, as
knowledge of the affected ecosystems (and, to a lesser extent, operational personnel)
evolves.
E. Risk treatment
60. After the Contractor has evaluated the Risk level of each Hazard, Risk treatment
(also referred to as Risk Mitigation or control) options should be evaluated. This
involves selecting one or more relevant options for changing the probability of an
occurrence, the effect of Risks (i.e. severity), or both, and implementing those
options.
61. Results from the Risk assessment process serve as inputs into the Risk treatment
process. While it is typically accepted that moderate Risks (in the yellow category of
the Risk matrix) or high Risks (in the red category of the Risk matrix) require Risk
treatment, it does not necessarily mean that Risks that are classified as low (green
category of the Risk matrix) are controlled to a level that is As Low As Reasonably
Practicable. In the context of Exploitation of Minerals in the deep seabed
environment, there may be low Risks that still require Risk treatment/Risk
Management (e.g., manage via routine procedures or monitoring).
62. Inherent in most approaches to Risk treatment is the need to appropriately
design and effectively execute Risk controls. A Risk control is a system, process,
procedure, equipment or other organizational capacity that prevents the consequences
of the threat from occurring. Controls can be:
(a) Preventive – aimed at preventing the unwanted events from occurring;
(b) Detective – designed to detect the unwanted event as it is occurring;
(c) Protective – designed to reduce the immediate impacts;
(d) Mitigating – designed to reduce the long-term impacts of the unplanned
event through eventual recovery to an acceptable state.
63. Figure 6 shows the basic hierarchy of controls for health and safety and
environmental Risks. The key objective of Risk Management is avoidance of impacts
(on the environment or humans) caused by planned or unplanned activities associated
with Exploitation in the Area.
18/27 21-17333

[Page 19]
ISBA/27/C/8
Figure 6
Hierarchy of health and safety and environmental controls
Abbreviation: PPE, personal protective equipment.
64. Once the Contractor identifies a preferred Risk treatment option, the modified
scenario can be reassessed to determine the new level of Risk (i.e. reassessing the
severity and likelihood of the consequences), with the objective of determining
whether further treatment is required and/or if secondary Risks are introduced. If
present, secondary Risks should be incorporated into the same treatment plan as the
original Risk and the link between the two Risks should be identified. An example of
this might be the application of an engineering control to reduce the chances of a
release into the environment (e.g. a redundant valve), but the change poses additional
health and safety Risks (e.g. without pressure relief, the trapped pressure between the
valves creates an increased Risk of injury).
65. The identified Risk controls will form the foundation of the EMS and HSP.
Obligations for reporting the effectiveness of the Risk treatment methods is discussed
in section III.E.
F. Monitoring and review
66. The Contractor should conduct ongoing monitoring and periodic reviews of the
Risk Management process and its outcomes throughout the life cycle of the project.
Such a review may be conducted concurrent with audit and review of the EMMP. The
purpose of monitoring and review is to assure and improve the quality and
effectiveness of the Risk assessment process, implementation and outcomes. In
particular, Risk controls implemented by the Contractor should be monitored for
effectiveness (i.e. re-evaluated) over time and adapted to changing conditions.
67. A Risk Management review serves to:
(a) Evaluate the effectiveness of the existing Risk treatment actions and Risk
levels by reviewing environmental and health and safety monitoring records,
corrective actions and the results of any prior audits;
(b) Identify any new Hazards and associated Risks resulting from changes in
the Plan of Work or implementation of new phases of the project.
68. A review or audit of a Risk Management plan could be undertaken at the
following times. It may coincide with a review or audit of the EMMP or HSP.
21-17333 19/27

[Page 20]
ISBA/27/C/8
(a) Following environmental and health and safety events (e.g. Notifiable
Events as set out in appendix I to the Exploitation Regulations), such as a significant
leak of hazardous substance, an unauthorized Mining Discharge, adverse
environmental conditions with likely significant environmental consequences,
impairment of and/or damage to environmentally critical equipment, occupational
time lost to illness or injury, medical evacuation, or a fatality;
(b) When there is a substantive adjustment to the relevant REMP;
(c) Periodically, for deep seabed Exploitation and/or monitoring activities
undertaken over extended timeframes, (e.g. every two years for operations/closure
period lasting five years or less, and every five years for operations/closure period
lasting more than five years).
69. A procedure should be developed by the project management team for
conducting Risk Management audits and include the following key components:
(a) Establish audit procedures;
(b) Determine the frequency of audits;
(c) Develop processes for scheduling, reporting and maintaining records (e.g.
maintenance of a formal Risk register);
(d) Ensure that the auditors are competent in that they should be able to
undertake the audit objectively and competently. Audits may be undertaken by
internal parties or external competent persons;
(e) Address personnel responsible for conducting the review and required
resources.
70. The Contractor should include information concerning Risk Management in the
annual report to be submitted in accordance with regulation 38 of the Exploitation
Regulations. Reference is made to section III.H, for further details regarding reporting
requirements.
G. Risk communication process
71. Communication and consultation are important considerations at each step of
the Risk Management process and may include the following key components:
(a) Cooperation and dialogue with Stakeholders, with a focus on consultation
and engagement;
(b) Developing a communication plan for both internal and external
Stakeholders at the earliest phase of the project;
(c) Identifying, recording and integrating, if necessary, Stakeholder
perceptions of Risk into the decision-making process;
(d) Establishing a team-based approach to define the context, ensure that all
Risks are identified and ensure that different views are considered.
72. Consultation and cooperation among users of the Area and relevant
Stakeholders will aid in the advancement of the scientific understanding of the sites
where mineral Exploitation will occur, the mining technologies involved, the impacts
and the environment’s response, which results in critical feedback to inform future
decision-making. Consultation involves a dialogue with people who may be interested
in or affected by a proposed activity. It is an opportunity to inform people about the
proposed project and an invitation to contribute to the project design/issue
identification and resolution process. Specifically, with regard to Risk assessment,
20/27 21-17333

[Page 21]
ISBA/27/C/8
communication is a key part of building trust, improving understanding within the
Stakeholder community of Exploitation of the Area and the related Risks, and helping
industry to better understand the views of Stakeholders who may be affected by those
activities. It is recommended that Contractors take the following seven principles of
Risk communication into account throughout the life-cycle of the project:
(a) Accept and involve the public as a partner;
(b) Plan carefully and evaluate efforts made;
(c) Listen to the Stakeholders’ specific concerns;
(d) Be honest, frank, and open;
(e) Work with other credible sources;
(f) Meet the needs of the media;
(g) Speak clearly and with compassion.
73. Therefore, in accordance with regulation 3 of the Exploitation Regulations, a
plan for ongoing consultation with parties identified as having existing interests in
the proposed project area, as well as relevant Stakeholders (see sect. II.C) should be
provided. The Contractor should describe the proposed consultation methods and
timelines, as well as the relevant Stakeholders and interested parties to be contacted.
H. Recording and reporting
74. The Risk Management process and its outcomes should be documented and
reported through appropriate mechanisms, such as within the application for the Plan
of Work (see sect. III) and the annual report (discussed below). The aim of recording
and reporting is to:
(a) Communicate all Risks considered and Risk Management activities
conducted;
(b) Provide information for decision-making and identify key intervention
points;
(c) Serve as a reference when reviewing Risks after some time has elapsed to
consider circumstances that have changed owing to strategy implementation or
changed business, environmental, regulatory or social conditions;
(d) Assist in interactions with Stakeholders, including those who bear
responsibility and are accountable for Risk Management activities.
75. The extent of the report will depend on the objectives and scope of the
assessment, and the documentation can include:
(a) Objectives and scope;
(b) Description of relevant parts of the system and their functions;
(c) Summary of the external and internal context of the organization and how
it relates to the situation, system or circumstances being assessed;
(d) Risk criteria applied and their justification;
(e) Limitations, assumptions and justification of hypotheses;
(f) Assessment methodology;
(g) Risk identification results;
(h) Data, assumptions and their sources and validation;
21-17333 21/27

[Page 22]
ISBA/27/C/8
(i) Gaps in uncertainties regarding data, analyses or interpretation;
(j) Risk analysis results and their evaluation;
(k) Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis;
(l) Critical assumptions and other factors that need to be monitored;
(m) Discussion of results;
(n) Conclusions and recommendations;
(o) References.
76. Risk registers are commonly used to present Risk information, to document the
outputs resulting from the Risk identification process and to present the results of
Risk analysis and strategy development. Typical contents of Risk registers include:
(a) A tabulation of the Risk events considered;
(b) Events excluded, the reasons for excluding them and their likelihood and
consequences;
(c) The results of Risk analysis and evaluation;
(d) Existing control measures, planned management actions, allocations of
responsibility and timing of actions.
77. Links to resources to assist with developing Risk registers are provided in
section VI.B.
78. Risk analysis results will be incorporated into the following components of the
application for approval of a Plan of Work submitted to the Authority under regulation 7
of the Exploitation Regulations, including the HSP, the Closure Plan, the EIA as
documented within the EIS, the EMMP and the ERCP.
I. Risk assessment tools and techniques
79. Various Risk assessment tools and techniques for Hazard identification and Risk
analysis are discussed in ISO/IEC standard 31010:2019. Links to resources that can
be useful in Hazard identification and Risk analysis are provided in section VI.B.
IV. Best practice in Risk Management
80. Below is a summary of some of the best practices to consider when undertaking
Risk assessment and Risk Management activities in an effort to conform with the
Exploitation Regulations:
(a) Establish Risk Management systems based on Good Industry Practice,
Best Available Techniques and Best Environmental Practices, including the
technology and procedures to meet health and safety and environmental requirements
for the activities proposed in the Plan of Work (regulation 13 (3) (c)). In that regard,
the Contractor could consider having its Risk Management systems assessed by an
accredited certification body;
(b) Design the Risk Management programme to reduce the Risk of Incidents
as much as reasonably practicable, to the point where the cost of further Risk
reduction would be grossly disproportionate to the benefits of such reduction, taking
into account the relevant Guidelines. The reasonable practicability of Risk reduction
measures should be kept under review in the light of new knowledge and technology
developments and Good Industry Practice, Best Available Techniques and Best
22/27 21-17333

[Page 23]
ISBA/27/C/8
Environmental Practices. In assessing whether the time, cost and effort would be
grossly disproportionate to the benefits of further reducing the Risk, consideration
should be given to best practice Risk levels compatible with the operations being
conducted (regulation 32);
(c) Apply the Precautionary Approach, as reflected in principle 15 of the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development, to the assessment and management of
Risk of harm to the Marine Environment from Exploitation in the Area
(regulation 44 (a));
(d) Openly consult and cooperate with users of the Area and relevant
Stakeholders on the Risks and impacts of Exploitation on the Marine Environment
(regulation 3).
V. Abbreviations, acronyms and definitions
ALARP As Low As Reasonably Practicable
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EIS Environmental Impact Statement
EMMP Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
EMS Environmental Management System
ERA Environmental Risk Assessment
ERCP Emergency Response and Contingency Plan
HAZID technique Hazard identification technique
HAZOP analysis Hazard and operability analysis
HSP Health and Safety Plan
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission
ISO International Organization for Standardization
REMP Regional Environmental Management Plan
“Hazard” means any object, situation, or behaviour that has the potential to
cause injury, ill health or damage to property or the environment.
“Risk” means the probability, high or low, that any Hazard will actually cause
harm.
“Risk Management” means the coordinated activities to direct and control an
organization with regard to Risk.
“Precautionary Approach” means an approach to environmental Risk
Management in which environmental Risks are addressed and prevented at early
stages, even if uncertainties remain, recognized in principle 15 of the Rio Declaration,
which reads as follows: “In order to protect the environment, the Precautionary
Approach shall be widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where
there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall
not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent
environmental degradation”. The Precautionary Approach does not necessarily mean
that proposed projects with unknown effects or impacts should not proceed; however,
21-17333 23/27

[Page 24]
ISBA/27/C/8
such projects should proceed with appropriate checks and Risk reduction measures in
place.
“As Low As Reasonably Practicable” (“ALARP”) means the principle, in Risk
Management, of reducing “the risk of Incidents as much as reasonably practicable to
the point where the cost of further risk reduction would be grossly disproportionate
to the benefits of such reduction”. As laid down in the Exploitation Regulations, the
“reasonable practicability of risk reduction measures shall be kept under review in
the light of new knowledge and technology developments and Good Industry Practice,
Best Available Techniques and Best Environmental Practices”.
VI. Information sources
A. References
Australia, and Tourism Department of Industry and Resources. “Risk Management:
Leading Practice Sustainable Development Program for the Mining Industry.” Dept.
of Industry, Tourism and Resources, 2016.
Clark, M.R., Jennifer M. Durden, and Sabine Christiansen. “Environmental Impact
Assessments for Deep-Sea Mining: Can We Improve Their Future Effectiveness?”
Marine Policy. Accessed December 18, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.marpol.2018.11.026.
Clark, M.R., H.L. Rouse, G. Lamarche, J.I. Ellis, Christopher Wayne Hickey, and
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (N.Z.). “Preparation of
Environmental Impact Assessments: General Guidelines for Offshore Mining and
Drilling with Particular Reference to New Zealand.” (New Zealand) National Institute
of Water and Atmospheric Research, 2017.
CSIR Environmentek. “Guideline for Environmental Management Plans.” Republic
of South Africa, Provincial Government of the Western Cape, Department of
Environmental Affairs & Development Planning, Cape Town: Department of
Environmental Affairs & Development Planning, Cape Town, 2005.
Department of Environment and Conservation. “Risk Assessment Matrix.”
Government of Western Australia, n.d.
DNV GL. “Recommended Practice: Managing Environmental Aspects and Impacts
of Seabed Mining.” DNV GL, 2016.
Durden, Jennifer M., Kevin Murphy, Aline Jaeckel, Cindy Lee Van Dover, Sabine
Christiansen, Kristina M. Gjerde, Aleyda Ortega, and Daniel O. B. Jones. “A
Procedural Framework for Robust Environmental Management of Deep-Sea Mining
Projects Using a Conceptual Model.” Marine Policy 84 (2017): 193–201.
Düzgün, Sebnem. “F-N Curves, Social Aspects and Risk Acceptability,” n.d., 23.
International Organization for Standardization. “ISO 31000:2009 Risk Management -
Guidelines.” International, 2018. http://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/
home/standards/popular-standards/iso-31000-risk-management.html.
International Organization for Standardization “ISO 31000:2018 Risk Management -
Guidelines,” 2018.
International Organization for Standardization, and International Electrotechnical
Commission. “IEC 31010:2009 Risk Management — Risk Assessment Techniques,”
2009. http://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/standard/
07/21/72140.html.
24/27 21-17333

[Page 25]
ISBA/27/C/8
International Seabed Authority. “ISBA/25/C/WP.1 - Draft Regulations on
Exploitation of Mineral Resources in the Area.” ISA, 2019.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration; Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement. “Probabilistic Risk Assessment: Applications for the Oil & Gas
Industry.” National Aeronautics and Space Administration; Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement, 2017.
The Biodiversity Consultancy. “A Cross-Sector Guide for Implementing the
Mitigation Hierarchy.” Koninklijke Brill NV. Accessed January 30, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004322714_cclc_2015-0013-003.
“The Mining Code | International Seabed Authority.” Accessed February 9, 2020.
https://www.isa.org.jm/mining-code.
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment. “Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development,” November 13, 2006. https://www.cbd.int/doc/
ref/rio-declaration.shtml.
Vamanu, B., A. Necci, S. Tarantola, and E. Krausmann. “Offshore Risk Assessment:
An Overview of Methods and Tools.” European Commission, 2016.
Washburn, Travis W., Phillip J. Turner, Jennifer M. Durden, Daniel O.B. Jones, Philip
Weaver, and Cindy L. Van Dover. “Ecological Risk Assessment for Deep-Sea
Mining.” Ocean & Coastal Management 176 (June 2019): 24–39.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2019.04.014.
B. Useful links
Topic URL
Standards and Guidelines
International Organization for https://www.iso.org/iso-31000-risk-management.html
Standardization (ISO) 31000:2018 Risk
management – Guidelines
International Electrotechnical Commission https://www.iso.org/standard/72140.html
(IEC) 31010:2019 Risk management –
Risk assessment techniques
Pacific-ACP States Regional Guidance http://dsm.gsd.spc.int/index.php/publications-and-reports
Documents and Reports (multiple
resources)
Risk Assessment Tools and Techniques
Risk assessment and management: Leading https://www.industry.gov.au/data-and-publications/leading-practice-
Practice Sustainable Development handbook-risk-management
Program for the Mining Industry
(Commonwealth of Australia, 2016)
Offshore Risk Assessment: An overview of https://euoag.jrc.ec.europa.eu/vicos/uploads/2018/10/03/Offshore%
methods and tools (Vamanu, 2016) 20Risk%20Assessment.Methods%20and%20tools.pdf
DNVGL-RP-O601 Recommended https://www.dnvgl.com/oilgas/download/dnv-gl-rp-O601-
Practice: Managing environmental aspects managing-environmental-aspects-and-impacts-of-seabed-
and impacts of seabed mining (2016) mining.html
21-17333 25/27

[Page 26]
ISBA/27/C/8
Topic URL
Probabilistic Risk Assessment: https://www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/files/pra-05012017-
Applications for the Oil & Gas Industry whitepaper.pdf
(National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, 2017)
Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment https://www.nopsema.gov.au/assets/Guidance-notes/A122420.pdf
(National Offshore Petroleum Safety and
Environmental Management Authority, 2017)
Guidance Notes on Risk Assessment https://ww2.eagle.org/content/dam/eagle/rules-and-
Applications for the Marine and Offshore guides/current/other/97_riskassessapplmarineandoffshoreoandg/pub
Oil and Gas Industries (American Bureau 97_riskassesment.pdf
of Shipping, 2000)
Offshore Risk Assessment Vol 1. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9781447174431
Principles, Modelling and Applications of
QRA Studies (Vinnem, 2020)
Ecological risk assessment for deep-sea https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333538553_Ecological_ri
mining (Washburn, 2019) sk_assessment_for_deep-sea_mining
Section 4.6.3 Summary of Operation https://www.iadc.org/forms/access-hse-case-guidelines-modu/
Boundaries (SOOB) Combined Operations –
Health, Safety and Environmental Case
Guidelines for Mobile Offshore Drilling
Units (International Association of Drilling
Contractors, 2015)
Guidelines for Ecological Risk Assessment https://www.epa.gov/risk/guidelines-ecological-risk-assessment
(US EPA, 1998)
Climate Change effects and impacts https://www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/climate-change/climate-
assessment: A guidance manual for local change-effects-and-impacts-assessment-guidance-manual-local-6
government in New Zealand [publication
ME 870, Chapter 6-Risk Assessment] (NZ
Ministry for the Environment, 2008)
Guidance on Risk Assessment for Offshore https://www.hse.gov.uk/offshore/sheet32006.pdf
Installations (UK Health and Safety
Executive, 2006)
Revised Guidelines for Formal Safety http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Safety/SafetyTopics/Documents/
Assessment (FSA) for Use in the IMO MSC-MEPC%202-Circ%2012-Rev%202.pdf
Rule-Making Process, (IMO, 2018)
Risk Management Framework for Mining https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/farming-natural-resources-and-
in BC [Governance Example] (Ministry of industry/mineral-exploration-mining/documents/compliance-and-
Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources, enforcement/miningbc_risk_management_framework_july2018.pdf
Ministry of Environment and Climate
Change Strategy, The Environmental
Assessment Office, 2018)
Risk Assessment Examples
Expert risk assessment of activities in the https://www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/marine/expert-risk-
New Zealand Exclusive Economic Zone assessment-activities-new-zealand-exclusive-economic-zone-and
26/27 21-17333

[Page 27]
ISBA/27/C/8
Topic URL
and Extended Continental Shelf (National
Institute of Water and Atmospheric
Research Ltd, 2012)
Chapter 19 Environmental Management http://eisdocs.dsdip.qld.gov.au/Port%20of%20Gladstone%20Wester
Plan – Port of Gladstone Western Dredging n%20Basin%20Dredging/EIS/19-environmental-management-
Project Environmental Impact Statement plan.pdf
(GHD, 2009)
Navigational Risk Assessment for The New https://www.epa.govt.nz/assets/FileAPI/proposal/NSP000002/Evide
Zealand King Salmon Co. Ltd. (Enhanced nce/4bd456a77f/Navigational-Risk-Assessment.pdf
Operating Systems Limited, 2012)
Environmental Impact Statement for South https://www.yumpu.com/en/document/read/52661607/embley
of Embley Project – Section 19 Hazard and
Risk, (Rio Tinto Alcan, n.d.)
Risk Management Framework for Mining https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/farming-natural-resources-and-
in BC [Governance Example] (Ministry of industry/mineral-exploration-mining/documents/compliance-and-
Energy, Mines and Petroleum Resources, enforcement/miningbc_risk_management_framework_july2018.pdf
Ministry of Environment and Climate
Change Strategy, The Environmental
Assessment Office, 2018)
Risk Representation – Risk Matrix Examples
Basic Risk Assessment Matrix (Western https://ww2.health.wa.gov.au/~/media/Files/Corporate/general%20d
Australia Department of Environment and ocuments/Clandestine%20drug%20labs/PDF/Risk-Assessment-
Conservation) Matrix-Provided-by-the-Department-of-Environment-
Regulation.pdf
Final Guidelines for Port & Harbour Risk https://www.maritimenz.govt.nz/commercial/ports-and-
Assessment and Safety Management harbours/documents/Port-harbour-risk-assessment.pdf
Systems in New Zealand (Maritime Safety
Authority of New Zealand, 2004)
21-17333 27/27