[Page 1]
ISBA
International Seabed Authority /27/C/3
Council
Distr.: General
31 January 2022
Original: English
Twenty-seventh session
Council session, part I
Kingston, 21 March–1 April 2022
Item 11 of the provisional agenda*
Draft regulations on exploitation of mineral resources
in the Area
Draft guidelines on the preparation and assessment of an
application for the approval of a Plan of Work
for exploitation
Prepared by the Legal and Technical Commission
1. The regulations on exploitation of mineral resources in the Area (“regulations
on exploitation”) require a Contractor to have an approved Plan of Work in place
before undertaking exploitation of mineral resources in the Area.
2. The purpose of an application for the approval of a Plan of Work is for the
Contractor to demonstrate, and for the International Seabed Authority to determine,
that the proposed exploitation activities will comply with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea; the Agreement relating to the Implementation of
Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
(the Part XI Agreement); the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority,
including the regulations on exploitation and related standards; the national laws,
regulations and administrative measures of the sponsoring States; and the terms of
the contract with the Authority. An application for approval of a Plan of Work shall
demonstrate how a Contractor will comply with the provisions of the regulations on
exploitation so that the Authority will have the necessary information to assess and
approve or disapprove said application.
3. The present document is aimed at assisting an applicant:
(a) To prepare an application for approval of a Plan of Work in accordance
with the regulations on exploitation;
(b) To understand the process through which the application will be reviewed
and considered by the organs of the Authority.
4. The present document covers the requirements for an application and
assessment of an application for a Plan of Work as set out in the regulations on
exploitation.
* ISBA/27/C/L.1.
21-17326 (E) 310122
*2117326*

[Page 2]
ISBA/27/C/3
5. Specific information on the preparation of the component elements of an
application is provided in the relevant regulations, standards and guidelines. The
present document should therefore be used in conjunction with the regulations on
exploitation, the regulations on prospecting and exploration for polymetallic nodules
(ISBA/19/C/17 and ISBA/20/A/9), polymetallic sulphides (ISBA/16/A/12/Rev.1) and
cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts (ISBA/18/A/11) in the Area, where necessary, as
well as the relevant standards and guidelines.
6. Existing bodies of practice and international standards from other similar
industries provide valuable information in preparing the components that comprise
an application under the regulations on exploitation.
7. Annex I to the present document contains a checklist to assist applicants in
ensuring that all required information and documents are included in the application.
It is the responsibility of the Contractor to ensure familiarity with their obligations
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; the Part XI Agreement;
the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, including the regulations on
exploitation and related standards; and the national laws, regulations and
administrative measures of the sponsoring States.
8. Annex II to this document contains a flow chart showing the process pursuant
to which an application will be considered.
2/7 21-17326

[Page 3]
ISBA/27/C/3
Annex I
Checklist for the preparation of an application for the approval of
a Plan of Work for exploitation
Regulatory requirement
(based on ISBA/25/C/WP.1) Application requirements
Form of applications Does the application include the following information
(regulation 7, annex I) required pursuant to annex I of the regulations:
• Information concerning the applicant?
• Information relating to the area under application?
• Technical information?
• Financial information?
• The written undertakings required under draft regulation 7
(see “Written undertakings” below)?
• Information on previous contracts with the Authority?
• A list of all the attachments and annexes to the application
(see “Material accompanying the application” below)?
Qualified applicants Is the applicant one of the following:
(regulation 5)
• The Enterprise, on its own behalf or in a joint
arrangement?
• A State party to the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea?
• A State enterprise?
• A natural or juridical person which possesses the
nationality of States or is effectively controlled by them or
their nationals, when sponsored by such States?
• Any group of the foregoing which meets the requirements
of the regulations?
Was the application submitted:
• In the case of a State, by the authority designated for that
purpose by it?
• In the case of the Enterprise, by its competent authority?
• In the case of any other qualified applicant, by a designated
representative, or by the authority designated for that
purpose by the sponsoring State or States?
If the applicant is a State enterprise or a natural or juridical
person which possesses the nationality of States or is
effectively controlled by them or their nationals, does the
application contain:
• Sufficient information to determine the nationality of the
applicant or the identity of the State or States by which, or
by whose nationals, the applicant is effectively controlled?
21-17326 3/7

[Page 4]
ISBA/27/C/3
Regulatory requirement
(based on ISBA/25/C/WP.1) Application requirements
• The principal place of business or domicile and, if
applicable, the place of registration of the applicant?
If the applicant is a partnership or consortium of entities, does
the application:
• Contain the information required by the draft regulations in
respect of each member of the partnership or consortium?
• Specify a lead member of the consortium or group?
Certificate of sponsorship If the applicant is a State enterprise or a natural or juridical
(regulation 6) person which possesses the nationality of States or is
effectively controlled by them or their nationals, is the
application accompanied by a certificate of sponsorship issued
by the State of which it is a national or by whose nationals it is
effectively controlled?
Is the certificate of sponsorship duly signed on behalf of the
State by which it is submitted?
Does the certificate of sponsorship contain the following
information:
• The name of the applicant?
• The name of the sponsoring State?
• A statement that the applicant is:
– A national of the sponsoring State; or
– Subject to the effective control of the sponsoring State or
its nationals?
• A statement by the sponsoring State confirming that it
sponsors the applicant?
• The date of deposit by the sponsoring State of its
instrument of ratification of, or accession or succession to,
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and
the date on which it consented to be bound by the Part XI
Agreement?
• A declaration that the sponsoring State assumes
responsibility in accordance with articles 139 and 153 (4)
of the Convention and article 4 (4) of annex III to the
Convention?
If the applicant has more than one nationality, as in the case of
a partnership or consortium of entities from more than one
State, has each State involved issued a certificate of
sponsorship?
If the applicant has the nationality of one State but is
effectively controlled by another State or its nationals, has
each State issued a certificate of sponsorship?
4/7 21-17326

[Page 5]
ISBA/27/C/3
Regulatory requirement
(based on ISBA/25/C/WP.1) Application requirements
Written undertakings Does the application contain the following written
(regulation 7) undertakings confirming that the applicant will:
• Accept as enforceable and comply with the applicable
obligations created by the provisions of Part XI of the
Convention, the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Authority, the decisions of the organs of the Authority and
the terms of its contract with the Authority?
• Accept control by the Authority of activities in the Area, as
authorized by the Convention?
• Provide the Authority with a written assurance that its
obligations under its contract will be fulfilled in good
faith?
• Comply with the national laws, regulations and
administrative measures of the sponsoring State or States
made pursuant to articles 139 and 153 (4) of the
Convention and article 4 (4) of annex III to the
Convention?
Material accompanying the Is the application accompanied by:
application
• The data and information to be provided pursuant to
(regulation 7)
section 11.2 of the standard clauses for Exploration
contracts, as annexed to the relevant Exploration
Regulations?
• A Mining Workplan prepared in accordance with annex II
to the regulations?
• A Financing Plan prepared in accordance with annex III to
the regulations?
• An Environmental Impact Statement prepared in
accordance with regulation 47 and in the format prescribed
in annex IV to the regulations?
• An Emergency Response and Contingency Plan prepared in
accordance with annex V to the regulations?
• A Health and Safety Plan and a Maritime Security Plan
prepared in accordance with annex VI to the regulations?
• A Training Plan in fulfilment of article 15 of annex III to
the Convention, prepared in accordance with the
guidelines?
• An Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
prepared in accordance with regulation 48 and annex VII to
the regulations?
• A Closure Plan prepared in accordance with regulation 59
and annex VIII to the regulations?
• An application processing fee in the amount specified in
appendix II to the regulations?
21-17326 5/7

[Page 6]
ISBA/27/C/3
Regulatory requirement
(based on ISBA/25/C/WP.1) Application requirements
Area covered by the application Does the application define the boundaries of the area under
(regulations 7 and 8, and annex I) application by a list of coordinates in accordance with the most
recent applicable international standard used by the Authority?
Is the area under application defined in the form of blocks
comprising one or more cells of a grid, as provided by the
Authority?
If the proposed Plan of Work proposes two or more non-
contiguous Mining Areas, does the application include a
separate Environmental Impact Statement, Environmental
Management and Monitoring Plan and Closure Plan for each
Mining Area, unless it can demonstrate that a single set is
appropriate?
6/7 21-17326

[Page 7]
ISBA/27/C/3
Annex II
Application and review process for a Plan of Work for exploitation
Secretary-General, within 45 days of receipt of
application, notifies the applicant of the information
that must be submitted
No
Application
complete?
Yes
Secretary-General provides comments to the applicant
within 7 days following the end of the comment period
At least 12 months prior to Upon approval
production, Contractor delivers by the Council,
Feasibility Study to Secretary- Contractor lodges
General environmental
performance
guarantee
Contract
schedules
updated and
registered in the
Seabed Mining
Register
21-17326 7/7