[Page 1]
ISBA
International Seabed Authority /27/C/5
Council
Distr.: General
31 January 2022
Original: English
Twenty-seventh session
Council session, part I
Kingston, 21 March–1 April 2022
Item 11 of the provisional agenda*
Draft regulations on exploitation of mineral resources
in the Area
Draft guidelines for the preparation of environmental
impact statements
Prepared by the Legal and Technical Commission
Contents
Page
I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
A. Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
B. Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
II. Environmental Impact Statement: template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
III. Information sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
A. Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
B. Selected useful links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Annex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
* ISBA/27/C/L.1.
21-17328 (E) 280122
*2117328*

[Page 2]
ISBA/27/C/5
I. Introduction
1. The present Guidelines have been developed to provide practical and technical
guidance on preparing an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the exploitation
of mineral resources in the Area, as specified in regulation 47 and annex IV of the
regulations on exploitation.
A. Purpose
2. The purpose of the EIS is to document and report the results of the
environmental impact assessment (EIA). As stated in the Regulations on Exploitation
of Mineral Resources in the Area, the EIS shall be in the form prescribed in annex IV
and shall be:
(a) Inclusive of a prior environmental risk assessment;
(b) Based on the results of the environmental impact assessment;
(c) In accordance with the objectives and measures of the relevant regional
environmental management plan; and
(d) Prepared in accordance with the applicable Guidelines, Good Industry
Practice, Best Available Scientific Evidence, Best Environmental Practices and Best
Available Techniques.
3. The EIS documents and reports the results from the EIA and provides an impact
assessment for the Environmental Effects identified by the EIA, with measures to
manage such effects within acceptable levels. As such, the EIS is nested within the
broader EIA process. However, while the Standard and Guidelines produced for the
EIA process include the reporting stage (the EIS), the present Guidelines have been
produced to be stand-alone and address specifically the EIS template provided in
annex IV to the regulations on exploitation. That annex provides a high-level EIS
template to provide contractors with recommendations for achieving EIA consistency
and standardization.
4. The Guidelines should be read in conjunction with the regulations on
exploitation, the relevant Exploration Regulations and other relevant Standards and
Guidelines of the International Seabed Authority, including but not limited to those
related to:
(a) Application for approval of the Plan of Work in the form of a contract (to
conduct exploitation activities in the Area);
(b) Environmental impact assessment process;
(c) Environmental Management and Monitoring Plans;
(d) Environmental management systems;
(e) Environmental baseline data collection;
(f) Hazard identification and risk assessment.
5. The Guidelines strongly encourage applicants or contractors to have recourse to
the Guidelines on the expected scope and standard of baseline data collection in the
preparation of an EIS. The latter Guidelines will assist applicants or contractors to
compile and collate the necessary baseline data that form a critical part of the EIA
process and its reporting in the EIS, including the description of existing conditions
and the assessment of impacts of activities.
2/41 21-17328

[Page 3]
ISBA/27/C/5
6. The applicable regional environmental management plan (REMP) should also
be considered by the applicant or Contractor in the EIA process and any management
approaches outlined in the REMP incorporated into the management and mitigation
methodologies of the EIA and the EIS.
B. Terminology
7. Except as otherwise specified herein, terms and phrases defined in the
regulations on exploitation have the same meaning in the present Guidelines.
8. “Effect” is the consequence or outcome of an action or activity during the
project. It is typically broader and more functional than an impact (see definition
below).
9. “Environmental impact assessment (EIA)” is the process of identifying,
predicting, evaluating and mitigating the physicochemical, biological, socioeconomic
and other relevant effects of development proposals prior to major decisions being
taken and commitments made. This includes all potential effects, both positive and
negative, and encompasses natural and anthropogenic receptors.
10. “Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)” is the documentation of the EIA
process, which describes the predicted effects of the project on the environment (and
their magnitude), the measures that the applicant is committed to taking to avoid,
minimize and reduce them where possible, and the residual effects that cannot be
avoided.
11. “Environmental risk assessment (ERA)” is a process to identify, analyse and
evaluate the nature and extent of activities and the level of risk to characteristics of
the environment.
12. “Impact” is the influence of an action or activity during the project on the
environment.
13. Except as otherwise specified herein, terms and phrases defined in the
regulations on exploitation have the same meaning in the present Guidelines.
II. Environmental Impact Statement: template
14. The applicant or Contractor should prepare an EIS following the template
provided in annex IV to the Regulations on Exploitation as appropriate. The format
is intended to “provide the International Seabed Authority, its member States and
other Stakeholders with unambiguous documentation of the potential Environmental
Effects on which the Authority can base its assessment, and any subsequent approval
that may be granted”.
15. The recommended format of the EIS template is designed to cover the general
content of an EIS, in the recognition that details of methodology or thresholds are
likely to be resource- and project-specific. The table of contents recommended in the
annex is reproduced below (acknowledging that the EIS template is not prescriptive
but a general guide to structure and content), along with the corresponding subsection
of the present Guidelines that provides guidance on the specific content of the EIS:
21-17328 3/41

[Page 4]
ISBA/27/C/5
EIS section Guideline section
Executive summary II.1
Introduction II.2
Policy, legal and administrative context II.3
Description of the proposed project II.4
Description of the existing physicochemical environment II.5
Description of the existing biological environment
Description of the existing socioeconomic environment
Assessment of impacts on the physicochemical environment and II.6
proposed Mitigation
Assessment of impacts on the biological environment and proposed
Mitigation
Assessment of impacts on the socioeconomic environment and
proposed Mitigation
Accidental events and natural hazards II.7
Environmental management, monitoring and reporting II.8
Product stewardship II.9
Consultation II.10
Glossary and abbreviations II.11
Study team II.12
References II.13
Appendices II.14
1. Executive summary
16. The executive summary is intended to be a non-technical summary that provides
a concise overview of the EIA and an initial view of the potential issues associated
with the proposed exploitation activity by interested stakeholders. It should include
the following elements:
(a) Description of the proposed project and its objectives;
(b) Economic, financial, and other benefits to be derived from the project;
(c) Anticipated impacts of the activity (physicochemical, biological, and
socioeconomic impacts);
(d) Mitigation measures to avoid, remedy, or minimize environmental
impacts;
(e) Linkages with the development of the Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan (EMMP) and the Closure Plan;
(f) Description of consultation with stakeholders and interested parties.
4/41 21-17328

[Page 5]
ISBA/27/C/5
17. The topics should be covered as succinctly as possible and follow the same
sequence as in the main report, to facilitate reference to more detailed descriptions.
18. The Contractor should prepare the executive summary in such a manner that it
can form a stand-alone document. The executive summary should include sufficient
detail to provide the user with an understanding of the key aspects of the assessment,
especially those relevant to decision points.
19. The description of impacts discussed in the executive summary should be
aligned with the risk and priority of impacts, which may be determined by
consideration of the following:
(a) Size of the project footprint and area of potential impact, as distinct from
the area of anticipated impact;
(b) Impacts on the marine ecosystem, with specific reference to the significant
findings relating to the physiochemical, biological, and socioeconomic environments
during the EIA process.
2. Introduction
20. The purpose of the introduction is to set the scene for the EIA: it sets out the
background to the proposal, a summary of the proposed activity (with reference to
additional details still to be provided) and outlines the EIA format, so that readers
will understand where to look for certain information. The introduction will rely
heavily on information included in the Plan of Work relevant to the context and
findings of the EIA.
21. This section should include sufficient detail for readers to form an overall
impression of the proposed project and how it has developed, and to understand how
the EIA is structured. As this section principally provides a road map to more detailed
material in the EIA, it may be relatively short.
(a) Background
22. This section should include a short description of the proposed project,
including all main activities and locations, and indicate the background work
conducted prior to the EIA, such as environmental baseline studies, risk assessments
performed as part of prospecting or exploration, and previous consultation with
stakeholders.
23. The background should contain highlights from the previous activities and refer
the reader to appropriate sections in the EIS for more information.
(b) Project viability
24. This section will present and discuss details of the economic context of the
project, provide a justification for project execution and a description of the benefits
to humankind. Reference will be made to key elements of the Plan of Work (described
more fully in the project description section, II.4) and will probably focus on
ecosystem management aspects, namely, physiochemical, biological and
socioeconomic considerations. The determination of project viability may include a
summary of feasibility investigations related to geophysical, engineering,
geotechnical, oceanographic, biological and other components of project operations.
(c) Project history
25. The Contractor should summarize work conducted prior to the EIA. A brief
description of the following may be included:
21-17328 5/41

[Page 6]
ISBA/27/C/5
(a) Resource discovery;
(b) Exploration undertaken;
(c) Component testing conducted, including a description of activities, if
applicable.
It should be noted that, if component testing was conducted, reports are to be included
in an annex to the EIS.
26. Details of resource discovery and exploration undertaken, depth zones, and
physical location may be presented in narrative form and accompanied by figures.
The time, location, and parties involved in exploration work should be included.
(d) Project proponent
27. This section of the introduction will summarize the credentials of the proponent
of the contract, including major shareholders, other contracts or licences held
(including in other jurisdictions), previous and existing contracts with the Authority,
and the proponent’s environmental record. This section should also cover the
technological and environmental expertise, capacity and financial resources of the
proponent (it is noted that discussion of the technical expertise and experience of
individuals performing the EIS is covered in section II.12).
28. The project proponent discussion in the EIS should include aspects in support
of the commitments made by the Contractor in the executive summary and in the
EMMP.
(e) Scope and layout of report
29. The subsection entitled “This report” in the annex IV template is intended to
guide users of the EIS in the effective use of the information contained in the EIS.
The section includes the following elements:
(a) Scope: This subsection should include a discussion of what is included in
the EIS, and what is considered to be out of scope, based on earlier work. An
important aspect here is a link to other supporting information, including the scoping
report from early in the EIA process, and previous risk assessments that evaluated
low-risk activities and those that received less emphasis in the EIA. Sufficient
information must be provided to ensure that the conclusions are properly understood,
or readers should be directed to the information used to form the risk determination,
to enable them to independently evaluate the risk. The applicant or Contractor should
highlight the activities determined in risk assessments to be higher risk and hence the
focus of the EIA;
(b) Structure: This subsection should refer to the prescribed structure of the
template, but should also indicate where to find information that is not obvious from
the table of contents, for example in cases where the EIS relates to a larger project
covering several Mining Areas within the Contract Area or for an EIS that contains a
large volume of information.
3. Policy, legal and administrative context
30. Relevant policies, legislation, agreements, Standards and Guidelines that are
applicable to the proposed mining operation must be discussed in the EIS to
demonstrate an understanding of national and international expectations for the
Contractor’s proposed mining project. While this is relatively straightforward, it is
still important to ensure that this section is clear and complete.
6/41 21-17328

[Page 7]
ISBA/27/C/5
31. The Contractor should outline the following aspects that may apply to the
proposed activities, and indicate how compliance with them will be assured:
(a) National and international legislation, regulations or guidelines that apply
to the proposed exploitation activities;
(b) Non-mining-related legislation, policies or regulations that may be
relevant to the proposed exploration activities, such as shipping regulations, maritime
declarations, marine scientific research, climate change policies and sustainable
development goals;
(c) International agreements, including the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
(SOLAS Convention), the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution
from Ships (MARPOL) and the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by
Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (London Convention);
(d) Regional agreements that are relevant to the area of operation, in particular
the Authority’s appropriate regional environmental management plan;
(e) Standards and Guidelines that will be adhered to during the life of the
contract, including the Standards and Guidelines of the Authority; the Equator
Principles; the environmental and risk management standards of the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO); the environmental management standard of
the International Marine Minerals Society (IMMS); and performance standards on
environmental and social sustainability of the International Finance Corporation
(IFC).
4. Project description
32. The EIS must include a description of the proposed exploitation, providing
details of the proposed activities, including relevant diagrams and drawings. In
accordance with the template headings and subheadings, the description of the
proposed exploitation should cover the following information:
(a) A statement of the objectives sought by the project, including the
underlying purpose and need for the proposed action;
(b) The precise location and boundaries of the proposed project (including the
Mining Area or Areas and the Contract Area), preferably on a detailed bathymetric
map, along with the general location of the project on a regional map;
(c) The type, size, shape, tonnage and grade of the mineral deposit;
(d) The spatial and temporal scale of the mining operation, including the
mining sequence and anticipated technologies for exploitation activities;
(e) The volumes of material to be recovered, processed and deposited or
discharged into the water column or back onto the seabed;
(f) The depth of penetration into the seabed and the proposed mineral
collection technique;
(g) The likely extent of any secondary impacts such as sediment plumes;
(h) The method used to transport recovered minerals to the surface;
(i) The proposed shipboard method for dewatering and separation of the
mineral resource from the sea floor sediment;
(j) Method for trans-shipment or transfers at sea of mineral-bearing ore;
21-17328 7/41

[Page 8]
ISBA/27/C/5
(k) The proposed waste management, transport and disposal activities for
materials or effluents to be discharged into the Marine Environment, and the
management of shipboard wastes to be transported to shore-based disposal facilities,
including the handling and management of hazardous materials;
(l) Construction and operation standards for equipment to be used in mining
activities;
(m) The workforce, including procedures for preserving the health and safety
of the personnel involved in the exploitation activities;
(n) Capacity-building commitments entered into by the Contractor;
(o) Commissioning and decommissioning procedures;
(p) Detailed development timetable for the entire life cycle of the project;
(q) Proposed details of any practicable restoration of the project area.
33. Background information such as project phases, facilities and machinery, and
process flow diagrams may be provided as appendices.
34. A key aspect of this section is the description of mining methodologies. Most
oil and gas operations use well-known techniques, equipment and overall operating
procedures, whereas the mining of seabed minerals is a relatively new activity and
there is no standard methodology. Methodologies will vary with mineral type and
depth. Where the technology is new or untested, this section needs to be very detailed,
as it is fundamental to an understanding of the likely impacts. This should include the
operations on the sea floor, and also water column activities (such as riser pipe
transfer), and also the methods for disposing of processing water, fine sediment and
other by-products. If there are relevant national or international best practices, it will
be useful to include an assessment of how the proposed operation will be aligned with
them.
35. A description of the overall timetable, from initiation and equipment
construction through to decommissioning and closure of operations, is important for
determining the extent and nature of various environmental impacts. The description
should include the major phases of the operation, together with the milestone dates
on which relevant tasks and activities are expected to be completed. The development
timetable provided under this section should clearly indicate the different phases in
the development proposal. For clarity purposes, a flow chart or Gantt chart should be
used where appropriate.
36. In the final section, the Contractor should provide an alternatives analysis
demonstrating that reasonable alternatives to the proposed project were rigorously
explored and objectively evaluated. Alternative screening criteria typically include
the following:
(a) Environmental impacts;
(b) Technical factors;
(c) Logistics;
(d) Financial feasibility;
(e) Stakeholder support.
37. The analysis summary could include a brief description of the preferred
alternative and the rationale for its identification, and direct readers to sections of the
EIS or other documents setting out full details of the process that led to identification
of the preferred option and discussion of eliminated alternatives and the reasons for
their elimination.
8/41 21-17328

[Page 9]
ISBA/27/C/5
5. Description of the existing physicochemical, biological and
socioeconomic environments
38. This section provides regional and site-specific information on the various
environmental conditions at the activity site or sites. The applicant or Contractor
should provide a description of the baseline condition of the physiochemical,
biological and socioeconomic environment. The aim is to provide a robust
environmental assessment against which impacts will be assessed. While the template
in annex IV to the regulations on exploitation provides a separate section for each of
these parameters, the Contractor should consider the interrelationship of these
parameters and the potential impacts of the proposed project on each of the
parameters.
39. For each of the three parameters (physiochemical, biological and
socioeconomic), the EIS should provide a detailed account of the Contractor’s
knowledge of the baseline conditions in the proposed Contract Area. These
descriptions should be based on both primary data from baseline studies completed
in the proposed Contract Area (for example, as part of exploration activities) and
secondary information from a review of existing literature and scientific studies for
the surrounding region. The Contractor should make use of information maintained
in the Authority’s DeepData database to examine characteristics of the surrounding
area. Maps, diagrams and photographs should be used in each section to clarify and
illustrate existing conditions, and relevant prior work in the proposed Contract Area
should be included in the appendices to the EIS.
40. The details in these sections should be based on site-specific and regional ERAs
that identified the higher-risk impacts that should be emphasized in the EIA. Each
section should provide a robust environmental assessment against which impacts can
be assessed. The level of detail in each section should be commensurate with the scale
and intensity of the proposed activity.
41. The sections on the physicochemical and biological environments should
include the following common descriptions and discussions:
(a) Key messages (overview of the main findings, covered in six or fewer
bullets);
(b) Regional overview (general environmental conditions within a broader
regional context, including a regional reference map);
(c) Studies completed (including environmental reference baseline data
collected in accordance with the exploration contract and contained in the DeepData
database);
(d) Summary of the existing (physiochemical, biological or socioeconomic)
environment (including key findings and notes on special considerations, and more
extensive than the key message section);
(e) Gaps and levels of uncertainty in existing knowledge.
42. Information specific to each of the three environments is described further
below.
(a) Aspects specific to the description of the existing physicochemical environment
43. This section of the EIS should also include a discussion of aspects specific to
the existing physicochemical environment, including:
(a) Meteorology and air quality (overview of climatology and description of
air quality, including chemical characteristics);
21-17328 9/41

[Page 10]
ISBA/27/C/5
(b) Geological setting (general geological landscape and topography, notable
characteristics such as hydrothermal vents, seamounts, abyssal hills and canyons, and
nature and extent of the resource);
(c) Physical oceanographic regional and site-specific setting (general
oceanographic aspects, such as temperature, salinity, stratification, currents and tides
and sediment rates);
(d) Chemical oceanographic setting (water mass characteristics at various
depths, such as nutrients, particle loads, turbidity and others);
(e) Seabed substrate characteristics (substrate composition, including pore-
water profiles, grain size, sediment mechanics and sediment composition);
(f) Natural hazards (potential hazards for the region, including seismic
activity, volcanic activity, cyclones, hurricanes and tsunamis) and how these may vary
in future as a consequence of climate change;
(g) Noise and light, including intensity, backscatter and attenuation (ambient
levels and influence of existing maritime, exploration and exploitation activity in and
around the proposed Contract Area);
(h) Greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, including gas and chemical
emissions from natural and anthropogenic activities in the region and affecting the
sea floor environment and water column chemistry, as well as ecosystem functions
and services.
Reference should be made to recommendations of the International Seabed Authority
on baseline data collection (ISBA/25/LTC/6/Rev.1) and to the Guidelines on
environmental baseline data, for more detail on certain oceanographic and chemical
parameters.
(b) Aspects specific to the description of the existing biological environment
44. In addition to the discussion topics listed in paragraph 41 above, this section
should include a discussion of aspects specific to the existing biological environment.
The Contractor should divide the discussions by depth regime (surface, midwater and
benthic, where appropriate) and include a discussion of the various biological
components and communities that are present in or make use of the area in and around
the proposed Contract Area. By presenting the biological conditions by depth, the
users of the EIS can assess linkages between observed or anticipated impacts and the
source and location of such impacts.
45. The discussion will address the diversity, abundance, biomass, connectivity,
trophic relationships, resilience, ecosystem function and temporal variability of the
communities present at each depth. Community-level analyses, previous work with
ecosystem models and ecosystem indications should also be included in this
discussion.
46. The Contractor should provide a comprehensive list of known species in and
around the proposed Contract Area. Taxonomic and ecological groups (ranging from
microbial communities to megafauna) that should be included at each depth include:
(a) Surface (from the surface to a depth of approximately 200 metres) –
phytoplankton, zooplankton, surface fish, near-surface fish, seabirds, turtles and
marine mammals;
(b) Midwater (from a depth of approximately 200 metres to approximately 50
metres above the sea floor) – zooplankton, nekton, mesopelagic and bathypelagic fish,
and deep-diving mammals;
10/41 21-17328

[Page 11]
ISBA/27/C/5
(c) Benthic (from approximately 50 metres above the sea floor to the sea
floor’s surface) – benthic invertebrates and fish communities, including infauna and
demersal fish.
47. It should be noted that specific depth intervals for the measurement and
presentation of baseline data should be appropriate for the particular environment and
that the more detailed description given in the Guidelines should be followed for the
establishment of baseline environmental data.
48. It is expected that much of this information will be data collated from the
Contractor’s own research and baseline data collection during exploration, but can
also include other data sources, including:
(a) Literature review to uncover all published records;
(b) Museum, university or research institute collection specimen records;
(c) Research databases available from national or international institutes
(including the DeepData database for the region);
(d) Global biodiversity databases available online (such as www.iobis.org and
www.fishbase.org for invertebrates and fish respectively).
49. The Contractor should include a description of species composition and
abundance. This should include the size distributions of the fauna and their life history
stages (such as larval and juvenile stages, which differ from the adult stage).
Considerations of species richness, faunal densities and community structures and
connectivity should be specifically included. Discussions of species should include
considerations of whether they are endemic (restricted to just the site, resource
substrate or region) or are known to be rare, threatened or endangered.
50. In addition, this section should include a summary of existing studies of the
ecosystems and communities across depths and integrate elements of those studies,
including life-history stages, recruitment and behavioural information. Food energy
linkages and the complexity of the food web should be included, giving consideration
to the impacts that may result from contaminants or other disruptions to the food web.
Given the emphasis on the ecosystem approach to management, it is important to
consider wider community relationships in respect of which information is available
that will enable assessments to move beyond community descriptions to incorporate
potential changes in ecosystem function (for example, Armstrong and others, 2012;
Tuck and others, 2014; and Thurber and others, 2015). It is common for multivariate
grouping and clustering-type analyses to be carried out for benthic invertebrate fauna
in particular. Where, however, analyses may span the depth-based habitats, they
should be included in the ecosystem and community section. There should, at the very
least, be a description and assessment of information on trophic interactions and the
linkages between food energy and contaminants in the food chain. Emphasis might
be placed on knowledge of trophic levels, the degree of interaction between benthic
and pelagic communities, whether there are specialized predators that could be more
vulnerable than generalists, and the complexity of the food web and species
interactions, with a view to gaining an idea of the resilience of the system to
disturbances.
51. Scientific interests may prompt a deeper look and the development of models to
quantify the trophic structure and energy flows through the ecosystem. There are a
number of ecosystem models that could be considered, as data are collected during
exploration phases. Such data can begin to support a trophic model structure that
quantifies the transfer of organic material through a food web, such as that based on
the widely used mass-balance Ecopath trophic model (Christensen and Walters,
2004). Modelling is likely to become a more common feature of EIAs, enabling
21-17328 11/41

[Page 12]
ISBA/27/C/5
mining-like perturbations to the system to be modelled and assessed (for example,
Chatham Rock Phosphate, 2014). Validation or verification of the efficacy of models
needs to be included, however, as an integral part of the process.
52. Each of these sections should describe sources and levels of uncertainty in the
data or analyses used. There are several available resources to assist the Contractor
in evaluating the above aspects and these are not duplicated here. A list of helpful
resources that may be used in presenting the existing biological environment may be
found in section III.B below.
(c) Aspects specific to the description of the existing socioeconomic environment
53. In addition to the generic discussion topics listed above, this section of the EIS
should include a discussion of aspects specific to the existing socioeconomic
environment, related in particular to the ecosystem services in and around the
proposed Contract Area that might be affected by the proposed project. Because the
proposed projects will take place in the Area, direct socioeconomic impacts to specific
communities are not necessarily expected.
54. Nevertheless, the project may have social impacts on people, by changing their:
(a) Way of life (lifestyles, work, interactions, recreation, etc.);
(b) Culture (customs, values and beliefs);
(c) Community (cohesion, stability, character and services);
(d) Political and governance systems (such as the extent to which people can
control decisions that affect them);
(e) Environment (quality, food security and safety);
(f) Health and well-being (physical, mental, social and spiritual);
(g) Personal and property rights (economic effects and customary rights);
(h) Fears and aspirations (perceptions about safety and the future).
These aspects should be described where relevant.
55. Potential impacts on ecosystem services are included in the regulations on
exploitation, with reference to the preparation of an EIS.
56. Accordingly, this section can discuss existing uses that comprise the ecosystem
services for the proposed Mining Areas or Contract Area, including but not limited to:
(a) Fisheries (for example, surface-level spawning grounds, nursery areas, or
feeding sites, as applicable);
(b) Marine traffic (for example, non-contract-related marine traffic occurring
at or near the proposed Contract Area);
(c) Tourism (for example, cruise line routes or areas used for game fishing,
sightseeing, marine mammal watching, or other relevant tourism activities);
(d) Marine scientific research (namely, any scientific research being
conducted in or around the proposed Contract Area outside of environmental studies
or sampling performed for the EIA or EIS or proposed in the EMMP);
(e) Other uses of the area in and around the proposed Contract Area (for
example, submarine cables, exploration projects or other exploitation projects);
(f) Sites of archaeological or historical significance located in or around the
proposed Contract Area.
12/41 21-17328

[Page 13]
ISBA/27/C/5
57. Relevant area-based management classifications or tools established under
subregional, regional or global processes should be identified and the reasons for their
designation explained, as this can enhance understanding of the ecological
importance of certain areas. The scope, geographical coverage and objectives of such
classifications and tools should also be explained.
58. Contractors should also consider characteristics of and issues specific to the
proposed workforce as part of the existing socioeconomic environment, including
topics such as the health, safety and well-being of personnel involved with
exploitation activities and any commitments entered into by the Contractor with
regard to capacity-building in the Area.
6. Assessment of impacts on the physicochemical, biological and socioeconomic
environments and proposed Mitigation
59. The Contractor should provide an assessment of potential impacts on the
physiochemical, biological, and socioeconomic environment. While the EIS template
provides a separate section for each of these parameters, the Contractor should also
consider the interrelation of these parameters and the potential impacts of the
proposed project on each parameter.
60. For each of the parameters (physiochemical, biological, and socioeconomic),
the EIS should provide a detailed description and evaluation of the potential impacts
that could result from the proposed project. The discussion should consider potential
impacts from all phases of the proposed mining activities, and also from potential
accidental events. For each of these phases of mining (including accidental events)
and for each of the potentially affected environments (physiochemical, biological or
socioeconomic, or a combination thereof), the Contractor should include a discussion
of the following:
(a) The nature and extent of any actual or potential impact;
(b) Measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy or mitigate such impacts;
(c) Any unavoidable (residual) impacts that may remain.
61. The key objective of these sections is for the Contractor to clearly communicate
the nature and extent of residual impacts, the length of time any impact from them
will continue, and whether or not the environment is expected to recover (and in what
time frame, following disturbance). Each section should focus on the elements
identified in the prior ERA that highlighted the higher risk impacts of the proposed
mining activity.
62. The level of detail in each section should be commensurate with the scale and
intensity of the proposed activity.
63. Each section should include the following:
(a) Key messages (overview of the main findings);
(b) Description of impacts:
(i) Nature and extent of any actual or potential impact, including indirect and
cumulative impacts, and interactions across impacts;
(ii) Measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy, or mitigate such impacts
(and that will be addressed in the EMMP);
(iii) Unavoidable (residual) impacts that will remain;
(c) Specific discussion of cumulative impacts, including such impacts from
proposed operations by the Contractor and other operations in the region;
(d) Summary of the residual effects (for example, in a tabular format).
21-17328 13/41

[Page 14]
ISBA/27/C/5
64. The area of potential impact should be described in detail. This is especially
relevant to potential dispersal of impacts beyond the Mining Area or the Contract
Area.
65. The sources and levels of uncertainty associated with impacts should be
quantified as far as possible. Attribution of confidence to analysis and prediction of
impacts is important for understanding both the relative importance of impacts and
the likely efficacy of mitigation measures. Assessment of uncertainty should:
(a) Identify relevant areas of uncertainty and gaps in knowledge, with the
implications that these have for the environmental impact assessment and its results;
(b) Propose how such uncertainty can be reduced or managed.
66. The Contractor should discuss information on potential recovery times
following disturbance and the longevity of residual effects. This will give readers an
understanding of the temporal component and efficacy of proposed mitigation
measures.
67. Information specific to each of the three environments (physiochemical,
biological and socioeconomic) is described further below.
(a) Aspects specific to the assessment of impacts on the physiochemical environment
68. This section of the EIS should also include a discussion of impacts and
mitigation efforts specific to the existing physiochemical environment, including:
(a) Meteorology and air quality;
(b) Geological setting;
(c) Seabed substrate characteristics;
(d) Physical oceanographic setting;
(e) Chemical oceanographic setting;
(f) Energy flow pathways (such as hydrothermal fluids);
(g) Natural hazards;
(h) Noise and light;
(i) Greenhouse gas emissions and climate change;
(j) Maritime safety and interactions with shipping;
(k) Waste management;
(l) Other issues.
69. The Contractor should provide a description and evaluation of potential impacts
of the proposed project on the physical environment described in associated previous
section on existing conditions. Sources of potential impact may include physical
disturbance and modification of the seabed during mining activities, sediment plumes
that could disperse beyond the footprint of the Contract Area, and the transport and
processing of materials conducted at the surface in the Contract Area.
70. Cross references with other sections of the EIS should be provided to enable an
evaluation of cause and effect linkages.
14/41 21-17328

[Page 15]
ISBA/27/C/5
(b) Aspects specific to the assessment of impacts on the biological environment
71. This section of the EIS should also include a discussion of aspects specific to
the existing biological environment, including:
(a) Surface;
(b) Midwater;
(c) Benthic;
(d) Ecosystem and community level.
72. The Contractor should provide a description and evaluation of potential impacts
of the proposed project on the existing biological environment as described in section 5
above. Sources of potential impact should be discussed in terms of their depth regime
and at a community and ecosystem level. Sources of potential impact may include
increased vessel activities and potential pollution from these vessels; changes in water
composition or clarity; noise affecting the food chain and availability of prey;
potential oxygen depletion; sediment plume effects in the water column; and
bioaccumulation of toxic metals and other contaminants. Temporal and spatial
impacts should be discussed in each subsection.
73. It is important that the final ERA associated with the EIA process be considered
in this section. Impacts of the mining or drilling operations will depend on the
resources, site and methods used and there are many such potential impacts. The
following are some of the key effects on biological structure and function that this
section should always consider:
(a) Potential surface impacts (0–200 metres):
(i) Increased vessel activities and potential pollution (from vessel discharges
and wastes) of the surrounding area;
(ii) Reduction in primary production (for example, through shading by
discharges); in shallow or clear deeper water this may affect macroalgae or
microalgae on the sea floor;
(iii) Stimulation of primary production by increased nutrient release (such as
nitrogen or iron in discharges) in photic depths;
(iv) Reduction in the availability of prey (through changes in abundance,
displacement or visibility), with effects on surface and deep-diving mammals
and birds, fish and mobile pelagic invertebrates (including through changes in
water composition and clarity or through noise and lights);
(v) Impacts of vessel activities on and above the actual sea surface;
(b) Potential water column impacts (200 metres from the surface to 50 metres
above the sea floor):
(i) Plankton and mesopelagic fish mortality;
(ii) Toxic effects of the release of metals and other contaminants (such as
ammonia and sulphides, causing pH reduction);
(iv) Bioaccumulation of toxic metals though the midwater food chain;
(v) Sediment plume effects through the water column (such as reduction in
visual clarity for feeding);
(vi) Potential oxygen depletion at depth;
(vii) Effects on deep-diving marine mammals;
21-17328 15/41

[Page 16]
ISBA/27/C/5
(viii) Potential noise effects (such as direct avoidance, masking faunal
communication and feeding disruption);
(c) Potential benthic impacts (sea floor to 50 metres above):
(i) Direct physical impact of mining and sampling gear;
(ii) Smothering and burying of animals by sediment;
(iii) Clogging of suspension feeding structures;
(iv) Toxic effects of the release of metals and other contaminants (such as
ammonia and sulphides);
(v) Potential noise effects;
(vi) Loss of essential habitat (such as spawning, nursery and feeding grounds);
(vii) Loss of other habitats and communities of particular biological
importance.
74. Impact assessments often focus on the spatial scale, but the temporal nature and
extent of impacts are equally important, and these will vary between faunal groups
and the source of impact.
75. A number of receptor groups should be considered in assessing impacts on the
biological environment. These relate to baseline faunal groups (see the Guidelines on
baseline environmental data), and will vary by site, but typically will include:
(a) Primary producers (such as phytoplankton, microalgae and macroalgae);
(b) Pelagic communities (such as fish and squids);
(c) Demersal fish (such as predators and scavengers);
(d) Benthic invertebrates (such as microfauna, meiofauna, macrofauna,
megafauna, microbes and protists);
(e) Marine mammals;
(f) Seabirds;
(g) Other rare or endangered species;
(h) Ecologically important or sensitive biogenic habitat-forming species.
These groups form the basis for more integrated community and ecosystem-level
assessments of impact.
76. Cross references to other sections of the EIS should be provided to inform the
user of cause and effect linkages.
(c) Aspects specific to the assessment of impacts on the socioeconomic environment
77. Socioeconomic impact assessments should:
(a) Identify stakeholders, groups and communities affected by the project;
(b) Describe data covering key socioeconomic issues of the affected
communities (such as community history, indigenous communities and culture) that
have shaped social and economic development;
(c) Explain methods used to carry out the assessment;
(d) Identify socioeconomic impacts and prediction of the significance,
duration and extent of impacts;
(e) Identify potential mitigation measures;
(f) Describe an appropriate monitoring framework.
16/41 21-17328

[Page 17]
ISBA/27/C/5
78. Socioeconomic impact assessments may include consideration of the scale of
effects (such as the creation of jobs and estimates of the risk of environmental
impacts), extent of duration of impacts in time and space, intensity or severity of
social impacts and an assessment of whether impacts are likely to be cumulative. It is
important to consider the social equity or distribution of impacts across different
populations: in other words, which groups are likely to be affected in which ways.
Attitudes towards and perceptions of the proposed project are among the variables
that should be considered in determining the significance of impacts.
79. A number of steps can help with constructing the likely nature and extent of
potential impacts on existing interests. The steps identified below are recommended
by the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (1994):
(a) First, scoping and identification of the probable social impacts for each of
the existing interests may be based on the consultation process or interviews.
Consideration needs to be given to the impacts perceived by affected groups and
communities. Principal methods may include public meetings, interviews,
workshops, surveys and reviews of the existing social science literature;
(b) Second, the likely and possible effects need to be estimated. The probable
social impacts can be formulated in terms of predicted conditions without the
proposed activity (baseline projection, from section 6 of annex IV to the regulations
on exploitation); predicted conditions with the proposed activity; and predicted
impacts, which may be interpreted as the differences between the future with and
without the proposed activity;
(c) Third, after direct impacts have been estimated, the assessment should
consider how affected people will respond in terms of attitude and actions. Important
elements here include proposed mitigation measures. Mitigation includes avoiding the
impact by not taking or modifying an action; minimizing the impacts through the
design or operation of the project; undertaking restoration or rehabilitation actions, or
compensating for (offsetting) the impact by providing substitute facilities or resources.
80. The Contractor can include a consideration of desirable outcomes (such as
beneficial impacts) and should include the scale of the effects, expected duration of
such effects and an assessment of whether the effects are likely to be cumulative.
Potential adverse impacts should be presented using the same format. The Contractor
should include a discussion of the probable socioeconomic impacts in comparison to
predicted conditions without the proposed project.
81. Economic impacts should be described and should include aspects of profit and
loss (net of costs) and effects on employment, including the location of those jobs and
the communities that will be affected. Indirect economic effects (such as the benefits
of additional jobs, revenue or economic activity in related or secondary sectors)
should be identified separately from direct employment and revenue arising from the
proposed activity.
82. This section of the EIS should include a discussion of aspects specific to the
existing socioeconomic environment, including:
(a) Fisheries;
(b) Marine traffic;
(c) Tourism;
(d) Marine scientific research;
(e) Area-based management tools;
(f) Other.
21-17328 17/41

[Page 18]
ISBA/27/C/5
Impacts on these elements may extend beyond the area of the proposed project and
may affect social or economic aspects in a regional setting.
83. Cross references to other sections of the EIS should be provided to inform the
user of cause and effect linkages.
7. Accidental events and natural hazards
84. A stand-alone Emergency Response Plan (ERP) should be developed as part of
the development of the EMMP, in accordance with the Regulations on Exploitation,
pursuant to which the ERP is to be current and based on identified potential hazards,
with established procedures for managing environmental emergencies. In addition,
the ERP should also state the important emergency contacts that handle environmental
emergencies related to the mining activities and the contact details. The ERP should
include responses to natural hazards, extreme weather, and accidents.
85. The EIS should refer users to the ERP, but the EIS itself should still include a
discussion on environmentally hazardous discharges that could result from accidents
or extreme natural events, as these are fundamentally different from normal
operational discharges of wastes and wastewaters. The discussion should outline the
probability of such accidental discharges, the impact that they could have and the
measures that will be taken to prevent or respond to such an event. Residual impacts
caused by such an event should also be included.
8. Environmental management, monitoring and reporting
86. The EMMP is separate from the EIS that is submitted with the Plan of Work and
is discussed in further detail in a separate Standard and Guidelines. The EIS should
refer users to the EMMP and need include only a brief discussion highlighting key
issues that will be addressed in the EMMP, including:
(a) Organizational structure and responsibilities;
(b) Environmental management system or systems;
(c) Environmental objectives;
(d) Mitigation and management;
(e) Monitoring plan;
(f) Corrective procedures;
(g) Closure Plan;
(h) Reporting for monitoring activities;
(i) Incident reporting.
87. Nevertheless, the EIS is the document in which the impacts of the proposed
project are detailed and sufficient information needs to be provided to enable the
Authority to anticipate possible environmental management, monitoring and
reporting requirements for an environmental approval. The information listed should
reflect the proponent’s environmental policy and how that policy is to be implemented
to meet the requirements of this section and previous sections during different stages
of the project life (namely, from construction to decommissioning and closure).
9. Product stewardship
88. The principles of product stewardship encourage those who design, produce,
sell, or use a product to take responsibility for reducing negative impacts on the
environment, public health, worker safety, and the economy. The EIS should contain
18/41 21-17328

[Page 19]
ISBA/27/C/5
a description of the intended use of the mineral-bearing ore. This description should
address how the Contractor will minimize health, safety, environmental, and
socioeconomic effects of the intended product or products, and should address the
following potential impacts:
(a) Energy and materials consumption;
(b) Waste generation;
(c) Toxic substances;
(d) Air and water emissions.
89. Proposed product stewardship should be aligned with the Sustainable
Development Goals, as applicable. In particular, responsible production and
consumption patterns should be established. This entails ensuring that the proposed
project does not lead to environmental degradation or overtaxing of natural resources
while reducing waste and improving resource efficiency.
10. Consultation
90. This section of the EIS should describe stakeholder engagement activities that
took place during the process of the EIA (see the Guidelines on the EIA process),
together with any stakeholder consultation activities anticipated after the Plan of
Work has been submitted to the Authority.
91. The EIS should include a description of the nature and extent of any
consultations conducted as part of the EIA and any consultations expected as part of
the EIS public comment period or review by the Authority. This discussion should
include a description of the process by which stakeholders were identified.
92. The Contractor should include a description of the protocol used for collecting,
logging and responding to stakeholder comments and concerns. The EIS should
include an evaluation of how the consultations performed were aligned with relevant
consultation obligations, if any.
93. The Contractor should list authorizations and other approvals required to
implement the project (both national and international), and a list of related
environmental review and consultation requirements under applicable regulations,
standards or policies.
11. Glossary and abbreviations
94. The EIS should include a glossary of terms used in the EIS, and also a list of
any acronyms and abbreviations used throughout the document. The EIS should also
include definitions for specific key terms used in the EIS, regardless of whether they
appear in the regulations on exploitation. This will help to ensure that users of the
EIS, including the decision-makers and relevant stakeholders, have a clear
understanding of the intention behind the use of certain terms in the EIS. The glossary
should be included in the table of contents for the EIS and referenced in the
introduction section of the EIS.
12. Study team
95. The EIS shall list the names of the persons who were primarily responsible for
preparing the statement and any significant background papers, including basic
components of the statement. Where possible, the persons who were responsible for
a particular analysis, including analyses in background papers, shall be identified.
21-17328 19/41

[Page 20]
ISBA/27/C/5
96. The list of preparers and contributors shall also state their qualifications,
including:
(a) Expertise;
(b) Experience;
(c) Education;
(d) Professional disciplines;
(e) Relevant registrations.
97. Curricula vitae of key members of the study team may be included in the
appendices if the Contractor determines that this information would be useful to
stakeholders reviewing the EIS.
13. References
98. Evidence obtained from outside sources should be documented throughout the
EIS, with the use of footnotes or other suitable reference mechanism. In addition, all
sources used in preparation of the EIS (including those specifically referenced in the
body of the document) should be listed in bibliography format, with full details of the
source (including website addresses, if applicable). This enables users of the EIS to
review the supporting documentation independently.
14. Appendices
99. The appendices section should include a list of all technical reports carried out
for parts of the EIA or that are used in support of any aspect of the EIA (such as prior
risk assessments or monitoring activities conducted as part of exploration contracts).
Copies of these reports should be provided as appendices to the report, with clear
indications as to which aspect of the EIS the document is being provided to support.
III. Information sources
A. Sources
Armstrong, C.W., N.S. Foley, R. Tinch and S. van den Hove (2012). Services from
the deep: Steps towards valuation of deep sea goods and services. Ecosystem Services
2: 2–13. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2012.07.001.
Australia, New South Wales Department of Infrastructure, Planning and Natural
Resources (2004). Guideline for the Preparation of Environmental Management
Plans.
Australian Government, Department of Environment (2014). Environmental
Management Plan Guidelines.
Chatham Rock Phosphate (2014). Marine Consent Application and Environmental
Impact Assessment. Available at www.rockphosphate.co.nz/marine-consent-application/.
Christensen, V., and C.J. Walters (2004). Ecopath with Ecosim: methods, capabilities
and limitations. Ecological Modelling 172: 109–139.
Clark, M.R., J.M. Durden and S. Christiansen (2020). Environmental impact
assessments for deep-sea mining: can we improve their future effectiveness? Marine
Policy 114. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.11.026.
Clark, M.R., H.L. Rouse, G. Lamarche, J.I. Ellis and C.W. Hickey (2017). Preparation
of environmental impact assessments: general guidelines for offshore mining and
drilling with particular reference to New Zealand. NIWA Science and Technology
Series 81: 103.
20/41 21-17328

[Page 21]
ISBA/27/C/5
Durden, J.M., L.E. Lallier, K. Murphy, A. Jaeckel, K. Gjerde and D.O.B. Jones (2018).
Environmental impact assessment process for deep-sea mining in “the Area”. Marine
Policy 87: 194–202. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.10.013.
Durden, J.M., K. Murphy, A. Jaeckel, C.L. Van Dover, S. Christiansen, K. Gjerde, A.
Ortega and D.O.B. Jones (2017). A procedural framework for robust environmental
management of deep-sea mining projects using a conceptual model. Marine Policy
84: 193–201. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.07.002.
European Communities (2001). Guidelines for the Assessment of Indirect and
Cumulative Impacts as well as Impact Interventions. Luxembourg: Office for Official
Publications of the European Communities, 2001.
International Organization for Standardization (2015). ISO 14001:2015
Environmental Management Systems – Requirements with Guidance for Use.
International Seabed Authority (2020). ISA DeepData. 6 January 2020. Available at
https://data.isa.org.jm/isa/map/.
__________ (2012). ISA Technical Study #10: Environmental management needs for
exploration and exploitation of deep sea minerals. Kingston: International Seabed
Authority.
International Seabed Authority, Legal and Technical Commission (2010).
ISBA/16/LTC/2 The International Marine Minerals Society’s Code of Environmental
Management of Marine Mining. The Mining Code, 2010. Available at
www.isa.org.jm/mining-code.
__________ (2019). Recommendations for the guidance of contractors for the
assessment of possible environmental impacts arising from exploration for marine
minerals in the Area. ISBA/25/LTC/6.
Le, J.T., L.A. Levin and R.T. Carson (2017). Incorporating ecosystem services into
environmental management of deep-seabed mining. Deep-Sea Research Part II –
Topical Studies in Oceanography 137: 486–503. Available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dsr2.2016.08.007.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (1994). Guidelines and principles
for social impact assessment. Inter-organizational committee on guidelines and
principles for social impact assessment: 27 p.
Senécal, P., B. Goldsmith and S. Conover (1999). Principles of Environmental Impact
Assessment Best Practice. No. 4.
Sharma, Rahul (ed.) (2019). Environmental Issues of Deep-Sea Mining: Impacts,
Consequences and Policy Perspectives. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Swaddling, A. (2016). Pacific-ACP States Regional Environmental Management
Framework for Deep Sea Minerals Exploration and Exploitation. Suva: Pacific
Community.
Swaddling, A., M.R. Clark, M. Bourrel, H. Lily, G. Lamarche, C. Hickey, H. Rouse,
S. Nodder, G. Rickard, P. Sutton and R. Wysoczanski (2016). Pacific-ACP States
Regional Scientific Research Guidelines for Deep Sea Minerals. Suva: Pacific
Community.
Thurber, A.R., A.K. Sweetman, B.E. Narayanaswamy, D.O.B. Jones DOB, J. Ingels
and R.L. Hansman. 2014. Ecosystem function and services provided by the deep sea.
Biogeosciences 11: 3941–3963.
21-17328 21/41

[Page 22]
ISBA/27/C/5
Tuck, I., M. Pinkerton, D.M. Tracey, O.F. Anderson and S. Chiswell. 2014. Ecosystem
and environmental indicators for deepwater fisheries. New Zealand Aquatic
Environment and Biodiversity Report 127: 143 p.
United Nations, Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, Report of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14
June 1992, A/CONF.151/26/Rev.l (vol. I), annex.
22/41 21-17328

[Page 23]
ISBA/27/C/5
B. Selected useful links
Topic source URL Comments
Databases
Ocean Biodiversity Information http://obis.org Global open-access data and
System (OBIS) information clearing house on
marine biodiversity
FishBase http://fishbase.se/search.php Database of fish species,
distribution and biology
International Union for Conservation www.iucnredlist.org Red List of Threatened Species
of Nature (IUNC)
Bird Life International www.birdlife.org Conservation of bird species
Swiss Seismological Service (SED) www.seismo.ethz.ch/en/home/ Seismological information
worldwide
PBS and The Ocean Alliance www.pbs.org/odyssey/index.html Five-year programme, called the
Voyage of the Odyssey, designed to
gather baseline data on levels of
synthetic contaminants in the
oceans
Argo https://argo.ucsd.edu/ International programme that
collects information from inside the
ocean
Coriolis www.coriolis.eu.org Project providing operational
oceanography data to monitor and
forecast ocean behaviour. Includes
sea-surface observation, in situ
measurements and assimilation of
in situ and satellite data
Rules, regulations and procedures
International Seabed Authority www.isa.org.jm/mining-code Mining Code
International Marine Minerals www.immsoc.org/IMMS_downloads Code for Environmental
Society /2011_SEPT_16_IMMS_Code.pdf Management of Marine Mining
International Marine Minerals www.immsoc.org/IMMS_code.htm Code for Environmental
Society Management
Det Norske Veritas (DNV) www.dnvgl.com/maritime/index.html Shipping compliance and pollution
reduction
American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) https://ww2.eagle.org/en/rules-and- Safety, compliance and
resources.html environmental protection relevant
to offshore operations
Standards and guidelines
Equator Principals https://equator- Equator Principals and Association
principles.com/resources/ Governance Rules
21-17328 23/41

[Page 24]
ISBA/27/C/5
Topic source URL Comments
ISO www.iso.org/iso-14001- ISO environmental management
environmental-management.html system standards
IFC https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/conn IFC Performance Standards on
ect/c02c2e86-e6cd-4b55-95a2- Environmental and Social
b3395d204279/IFC_Performance_ Sustainability
Standards.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&C
VID=kTjHBzk
24/41 21-17328

[Page 25]
2 Annex
1
-1
7
3 2 Review form: EIS content (provided as a checklist to help the applicant or Contractor to evaluate
8
completeness and adequacy of content of the EIS)
EIS section/ Relevant section in
annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
Executive summary Is a description of the EIA and its objectives II.1
included?
Does the description contain:
(a) Goals of the EIA?
(b) Overall objectives?
(c) Summary of the relationship between
physiochemical, biological and socioeconomic
environments?
Are the predicted physicochemical, biological and
socioeconomic impacts of the activity described?
Are the residual impacts prioritized based on the
magnitude of impact?
Does the executive summary summarize the
recommended mitigation measures to avoid, remedy
or minimize environmental impacts?
Does the executive summary include a discussion of
the economic, financial and other benefits to be
derived from the project?
Is a statement of commitment to conservation,
preservation and risk mitigation included?
Does the executive summary summarize the dialogue
between the Contractor with stakeholders and
interested parties?
I
S
B
Is a statement of commitment in accordance with the A
2 5 draft regulations included in the executive summary?
/2
7 /C
/4
1
/5

[Page 26]
2 /46
1
E anIS
n
es xe c It Vio sn e/
c tion Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements?
R Ge ul ie dv ea ln int es se ction in
Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
I S B
A
/2
7
Introduction 1.1–1.5 Does the introduction provide the necessary context II.2
/C
/5
for the sections of the report? Does it indicate where
additional information for the EIS can be found?
Does the introduction summarize the proposed project
rather than the EIA?
Is a background section included in the introduction?
Is information about previous activities included?
Does the introduction discuss the project viability by
providing details regarding:
(a) Economic context?
(b) Justification for the project execution?
(c) Benefits?
Is a summary of the work conducted prior to the EIA
included?
Are details regarding the credentials of the proponent
for the contract discussed, including the following:
(a) Major shareholders?
(b) Other contracts?
(c) Licences held?
(d) Technological expertise?
(e) Environmental expertise?
(f) Capacity?
(g) Financial resources?
Is a description of the scope and report structure
included in the Introduction?
2
1
-1
7
3
2
8

[Page 27]
2
-11 EIS section/ Relevant section in
7 annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
3
2
8
Policy, legal and Does the EIS discuss how the Contractor will address II.3
administrative context international and national legislation, regulation, or
2.1–2.4 guidelines that apply to the proposed exploitation
activities?
Does the EIS discuss how the Contractor will address
relevant non-mining related legislation, policies, or
regulations?
Does the EIS discuss how the Contractor will address
international agreements such as:
(a) UNCLOS?
(b) SOLAS Convention?
(c) MARPOL?
(d) London Convention?
Does the EIS discuss how the Contractor will address
standards and guidelines that will be adhered to
during the life of the contract from groups such as:
(a) International Seabed Authority?
(b) Equator Principles?
(c) International Organization for Standardization
(ISO)?
(d) International Marine Minerals Society (IMMS)?
(e) International Finance Corporation (IFC)?
(f) Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative?
I
S
B
A
/2
2 7 7 /C
/4
1
/5

[Page 28]
2 /48
1
E anIS
n
es xe c It Vio sn e/
c tion Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements?
R Ge ul ie dv ea ln int es se ction in
Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
I S B
A
/2
7
Description of the Does the EIS contain a description of the proposed II.4
/C
/5
proposed development exploitation, including details of proposed activities
3.1–3.8 and relevant diagrams and drawings?
Does the EIS include a Contractor alternatives
analysis demonstrating that reasonable alternatives to
the proposed project were explored and objectively
evaluated?
Description of the Does the EIS include an overview of the main II.5
existing findings, covered in six or fewer bullets?
physicochemical
environment 4.1–4.12
Does the EIS include an overview of the regional
context and regional reference maps for the Contract
Area?
Does the EIS provide a description of all studies II.5
completed, including environmental reference
baseline data collected under the exploration
contract?
Does the EIS include scientific data contained in the
Authority’s DeepData database both for the Contract
Area and for the regional context?
Does the EIS discuss meteorology and air quality,
including:
(a) Overview of the climatology?
(b) Description of existing air quality (including
chemical characteristics)?
Does the EIS discuss the geological setting,
including:
(a) General geological landscape and topography?
2
-11 (b) Nature and extent of the resource?
7
3
2
8

[Page 29]
2
-11 EIS section/ Relevant section in
7 annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
3
2
8
Does the EIS discuss the physical oceanographic
regional and site-specific setting, including:
(a) General oceanographic aspects such as
stratification and sediment rates?
(b) Notable characteristics such as hydrothermal
vents, seamounts, and canyons?
Description of the Does the EIS discuss the sea substrate characteristics II.5
existing and substrate composition, including:
physicochemical
(a) Pore-water profiles?
environment
4.1–4.12
(b) Grain size?
(cont.)
(c) Sediment mechanics?
(d) Sediment composition?
Does the EIS discuss potential natural hazards for the
region, including:
(a) Seismic activity?
(b) Volcanic activity?
(c) Cyclones, hurricanes or tsunamis?
Does the EIS discuss noise and light conditions,
including:
(a) Ambient levels?
(b) Influence of existing maritime, exploration, and
exploitation activity in and around the proposed
Contract Area?
Does the EIS discuss greenhouse gas emissions and
climate change considerations, including: I
S
B
A
/2
2 9 7 /C
/4
1
/5

[Page 30]
3 /40
1
E anIS
n
es xe c It Vio sn e/
c tion Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements?
R Ge ul ie dv ea ln int es se ction in
Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
I S B
A
/2
7
(a) Gas emissions from natural and anthropogenic
/C
/5
activities in the region and affecting the sea floor
and water column chemistry?
(b) Chemical emissions from natural and
anthropogenic activities in the region and
affecting the sea floor and water column
chemistry?
Does the EIS document the use of best available
scientific evidence and best available techniques in
studying the above conditions?
Does the EIS contain a summary that expands on the
key messages above for the physiochemical
environment, which includes key findings and also
special considerations?
Description of the Does the EIS include an overview of the main II.5
existing biological findings, covered in six or fewer bullets?
environment
Does the EIS include an overview of the regional
5.1–5.5
context and regional reference maps for the Contract
Area?
Does the EIS provide a description of all studies
completed, including environmental reference
baseline data collected under the exploration
contract?
Does the EIS include scientific data contained in the
Authority’s DeepData database both for the Contract
Area and for the regional context?
For the surface depth (surface to a depth of
approximately 200 metres), does the EIS discuss the
following taxonomic and ecological groups:
(a) Phytoplankton?
2
1
-1 (b) Zooplankton?
7
3
2
8

[Page 31]
2
-11 EIS section/ Relevant section in
7 annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
3
2
8
(c) Surface fish?
(d) Near surface fish?
(e) Seabirds?
(f) Turtles?
(g) Marine mammals?
For the midwater depth (from a depth of
approximately 200 metres to approximately 50 metre
above the sea floor), does the EIS discuss the
following taxonomic/ecological groups:
(a) Zooplankton?
(b) Nekton?
(c) Mesopelagic and bathypelagic fish?
(d) Deep-diving mammals?
Description of the For the taxonomic and ecological groups listed above, II.5
existing biological does the EIS discuss:
environment
(a) Diversity?
5.1–5.5
(cont.)
(b) Biomass?
(c) Species composition?
(d) Species richness?
(e) Species abundance?
(f) Size of the fauna?
(g) Temporal variability?
(h) Ecosystem function? I
S
B
A
(i) Resilience? /2
3 1 7 /C
/4
1
/5

[Page 32]
3 /42
1
E anIS
n
es xe c It Vio sn e/
c tion Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements?
R Ge ul ie dv ea ln int es se ction in
Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
I S B
A
/2
7
(j) Trophic relationships?
/C
/5
(k) Life-history stages of fauna (e.g. larval and
juvenile stages which differ from adults)?
(l) Community structures and connectivity
(including recruitment and behavioural
information)?
(m) Considerations of endemic species?
(n) Considerations for species that known to be rare,
threatened, or endangered?
Does the EIS document the use of best available
scientific evidence and best available techniques in
studying the above conditions?
Does the EIS contain a summary that expands on the
key messages above for the biological environment,
which includes key findings as well as special
considerations?
Description of the Does the EIS include an overview of the main II.5
existing socioeconomic findings, covered in six or fewer bullets?
environment
Does the EIS include an overview of the regional
6.1–6.4
context and regional reference maps for the Contract
Area?
Description of the Does the EIS discuss the following aspects of
existing socioeconomic ecosystem services:
environment
(a) Fisheries (e.g. surface-level spawning grounds,
6.1–6.4
nursery areas or feeding sites, as applicable)?
(cont.)
(b) Marine traffic (i.e. non-contract-related marine
traffic occurring at or near the proposed Contract
Area)?
2
1
-1
7
3
2
8

[Page 33]
2
-11 EIS section/ Relevant section in
7 annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
3
2
8
(c) Tourism (e.g. cruise-line routes or areas used for
game fishing, sightseeing, marine mammal
watching or other relevant tourism activities)?
(d) Marine scientific research (i.e. any scientific
research being conducted in or around the
proposed Contract Area outside of
environmental studies or sampling performed for
the EIA or EIS or proposed in the environmental
management and monitoring plan)?
(e) Area-based data management tools such as
DeepData?
(f) Other uses of the area in and around the
proposed Contract Area (e.g. submarine cables,
exploration projects, or other exploitation
projects)?
(g) Sites of archaeological or historical significance
located in or around the proposed Contract
Area?
Does the EIS document the use of best available
scientific evidence and best available techniques in
studying the above conditions?
Does the EIS contain a summary that expands on the
key messages above for the socioeconomic
environment, which includes key findings and also
special considerations?
Assessment of impacts For the physiochemical environment, does the EIS II.6
on the physiochemical include a description of direct, indirect, and
environment and cumulative impacts:
proposed Mitigation
(a) Nature and extent of any or potential impacts?
7.1–7.15
I
S
B
(b) Measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy, or A
mitigate such impacts?
/2
3 3 7 /C
/4
1
/5

[Page 34]
3 /44
1
E anIS
n
es xe c It Vio sn e/
c tion Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements?
R Ge ul ie dv ea ln int es se ction in
Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
I S B
A
/2
7
(c) Remaining (residual) impacts?
/C
/5
For the physiochemical environment, does the EIS
include a discussion of:
(a) Key messages (overview of the main findings)?
(b) Description of impacts, including:
(i) The nature and extent of any actual or potential
impact, including indirect and cumulative
impacts, and interactions across impacts?
(ii) Measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy, or
mitigate such impacts (and that will be
addressed in the environmental management and
monitoring plan)?
(iii) Unavoidable (residual) impacts that will
remain?
(c) Specific discussion of cumulative impacts,
including such impacts from proposed
operations by the Contractor and other
operations in the region?
Does the EIS discuss the following aspects specific to
potential impacts on the physiochemical environment:
(a) Meteorology and air quality?
(b) Geological setting?
(c) Physical oceanographic setting?
(d) Chemical oceanographic setting?
(e) Seabed substrate characteristics?
(f) Natural hazards?
2 1 (g) Noise and light?
-1
7
3
2
8

[Page 35]
2
-11 EIS section/ Relevant section in
7 annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
3
2
8
(h) Greenhouse gas emissions and climate change?
(i) Maritime safety and interactions with shipping?
(j) Waste management?
(k) Other issues?
Assessment of impacts Does the EIS discuss, at a minimum, sources of II.6
on the physiochemical potential impact that include:
environment and
(a) Physical disturbance of the seabed during
proposed Mitigation
mining activities?
7.1–7.15
(cont.)
(b) Sediment plumes that could disperse beyond the
footprint of the Contract Area?
(c) Potential impact from material transport and
processing activities conducted at the surface in
the Contract Area?
Does the discussion provide cross-references to other
sections of the EIS to inform the user about cause and
effect linkages?
Does the discussion include the expected time to
recover following disturbance and the longevity of
residual effects?
Does EIS include a summary of the residual effects in
a tabular format?
Assessment of impacts For the biological environment, does the EIS discuss II.6
on the biological a description of direct, indirect, and cumulative
environment and impacts:
proposed Mitigation
(a) Nature and extent of any or potential impacts?
8.1–8.8
(b) Measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy or
I
S
mitigate such impacts? B
A
/2
3 5 (c) Remaining (residual) impacts? 7 /C
/4
1
/5

[Page 36]
3 /46
1
E anIS
n
es xe c It Vio sn e/
c tion Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements?
R Ge ul ie dv ea ln int es se ction in
Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
I S B
A
/2
7
For the biological environment, does the EIS include
/C
/5
a discussion of:
(a) Key messages (overview of the main findings)?
(b) Description of impacts, including:
(i) Nature and extent of any actual or potential
impact, including indirect and cumulative
impacts, and interactions across impacts?
(ii) Measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy, or
mitigate such impacts (and that will be
addressed in the environmental management and
monitoring plan)?
(iii) Unavoidable (residual) impacts that will
remain?
(c) Specific discussion of cumulative impacts,
including such impacts from proposed
operations by the Contractor and other
operations in the region?
Assessment of impacts Does the EIS discuss aspects specific to the existing
on the biological biological environment, such as the following:
environment and
(a) Depth:
proposed Mitigation
8.1–8.8
(i) Surface?
(cont.)
(ii) Midwater?
(iii) Benthic?
(b) Ecosystems?
(c) Communities?
This section should also include a summary of
existing studies of the ecosystems and communities,
2
1
-1
7
3
2
8

[Page 37]
2
-11 EIS section/ Relevant section in
7 annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
3
2
8
and temporal and spatial impacts should be discussed
in each subsection.
For each aspect listed above, does the EIS discuss
potential impacts that include:
(a) Impacts from increased vessel activities and
potential pollution from these vessels?
(b) Impacts from changes in water composition,
clarity or noise, affecting the food chain and
availability of prey?
(c) Potential oxygen depletion impacts?
(d) Sediment plume effects in the water column?
(e) Bioaccumulation of toxic metals and other
contaminants?
(f) Temporal and spatial impacts?
Does the discussion provide cross-references to other
sections of the EIS to inform the user about cause and
effect linkages?
Does the discussion include the expected time to
recover following disturbance and the longevity of
residual effects?
Does EIS include a summary of the residual effects in
a tabular format?
Assessment of impacts For the socioeconomic environment, does the EIS II.6
on the socioeconomic include a description of direct, indirect, and
environment and cumulative impacts:
proposed Mitigation
(a) Nature and extent of any or potential impacts?
9.1–9.5
I
(b) Measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy, or S B
A
mitigate such impacts? /2
3 7 7 /C
/4
1
/5

[Page 38]
3 /48
1
E anIS
n
es xe c It Vio sn e/
c tion Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements?
R Ge ul ie dv ea ln int es se ction in
Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
I S B
A
/2
7
(c) Remaining (residual) impacts?
/C
/5
For the socioeconomic environment, does the EIS
include a discussion of:
(a) Key messages (overview of the main findings)?
(b) Description of impacts, including:
(i) Nature and extent of any actual or potential
impact, including indirect and cumulative
impacts, and interactions across impacts?
(ii) Measures that will be taken to avoid, remedy, or
mitigate such impacts (and that will be
addressed in the environmental management and
monitoring plan)?
(iii) Unavoidable (residual) impacts that will
remain?
(c) Specific discussion of cumulative impacts,
including such impacts from proposed
operations by the Contractor and other
operations in the region?
For the socioeconomic environment, does the EIS
include a discussion of:
(a) Fisheries?
(b) Marine traffic?
(c) Tourism?
(d) Marine scientific research?
(e) Area-based management tools?
(f) Other considerations?
2
1
-1
7
3
2
8

[Page 39]
2
-11 EIS section/ Relevant section in
7 annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
3
2
8
Does the EIS include a discussion of desirable
outcomes or beneficial impacts as wells as potential
adverse impacts for the socioeconomic environment?
Does the EIS include a discussion of the scale of the
effects, expected duration of such effects, and an
assessment of whether the effects are likely to be
cumulative?
Does this section provide cross-references to other
sections of the EIS to inform the user about cause and
effect linkages?
Does EIS include a summary of the residual effects in
a tabular format?
Accidental events and Does the EIS refer users to a stand-alone emergency II.7
natural hazards response plan, which details identified potential
10.1–10.3 hazards and established procedures for managing
environmental emergencies? Does the EIS include a
discussion on environmentally hazardous discharges,
including probability of occurrence and proposed
measures to prevent or respond to such an event?
Environmental Does the EIS refer users to the environmental II.8
management, management and monitoring plan and include a brief
monitoring and discussion of key issues addressed in the
reporting environmental management and monitoring plan,
11.1–11.4 including:
(a) Organizational structure and responsibilities?
(b) Environmental management systems?
(c) Environmental objectives?
(d) Mitigation and management?
I
S
(e) Monitoring plan? B
A
/2
3 9 (f) Corrective procedures? 7 /C
/4
1
/5

[Page 40]
4 /40
1
E anIS
n
es xe c It Vio sn e/
c tion Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements?
R Ge ul ie dv ea ln int es se ction in
Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
I S B
A
/2
7
(g) Closure plan?
/C
/5
(h) Reporting for monitoring activities?
(i) Incident reporting?
Product stewardship Does the EIS contain a description of the intended II.9
12 use of the mineral-bearing ore and address how
health, safety, environmental, and socioeconomic
effects of the intended product or products will be
minimized, including the potential impacts of:
(a) Energy and materials consumption?
(b) Waste generation?
(c) Toxic substances?
(d) Air and water emissions?
Consultation Does the EIS clearly identify the stakeholders for the II.10
13.1–13.4 project and their role relevant to approvals and
consultation? Does the EIS discuss the nature and
extent of any consultations conducted as part of the
EIS?
Does the EIS include a description of the protocol
used for collecting, logging and responding to
stakeholder comments and concerns, and an
evaluation of how consultations were aligned with
relevant consultation obligations, if any?
Does the EIS contain a statement describing the
intended use of the EIS, including a list of
stakeholders expected to use the EIS? This section
should include a list of authorizations and other
approvals required to implement the project, and of
related environmental review and consultation
requirements.
2
1
-1
7
3
2
8

[Page 41]
2
-11 EIS section/ Relevant section in
7 annex IV section Do the components of the EIS meet these requirements? Guidelines Describe how the EIS meets these criteria
3
2
8
Glossary and Does the EIS include a glossary of terms used in the II.11
abbreviations EIS and a list of any acronyms and abbreviations
14 used throughout the documents?
Study team Does the EIS list the names of persons responsible for II.12
15 preparing the statement? The list should include the
qualifications of the preparers and contributors,
including:
(a) Expertise?
(b) Experience?
(c) Education?
(d) Professional disciplines?
(e) Relevant registrations?
Are résumés of key members included in appendices?
References Is all evidence from outside sources provided in the II.13
16 EIS documented in footnotes or by another suitable
reference mechanism?
Are all references used in preparation of the EIS
(including those specifically referenced in the body of
the document) listed in bibliography format,
including the full details of the sources?
Appendices Does the EIS include an appendices section with a list
17 of all technical reports carried out for parts of the EIA
or that were used in support of any aspect of the EIA
or EIS?
I
S
B
A
/2
4 1 7 /C
/4
1
/5